Making effective use of "messy data" for conservationUnconventionally collected data are increasingly being used in conservation - collected by citizen scientists, rangers or local residents, or gathered from the internet or other records. However their potential is still unrealised, and some uses are even counterproductive. I illustrate this with examples grouped into three common fallacies: i) "That's what the data say so it must be true!" - believing raw data without properly considering biases and uncertainties; ii) "We don't know anything about this, and it would be too expensive to find out!" - dismissing the opportunity to use messy data to support conservation actions; iii) "I gave them instructions, what more do they need?" - ignoring the motivations of the data generators. I then talk about potential ways forward for each of these fallacies: using field trials, models and rules of thumb to account for observation and process error; thinking creatively about the kinds of data that could be collected and by whom, in a cost-effective way; and empowering data collectors to support more effective and sustainable monitoring for conservation. I bring these themes together into a framework to support the effective use of messy data in conservation - with statistical ecologists at its heart.
Spatial Capture-Recapture: Highlights from a decade (or so) in reviewSpatial capture-recapture (SCR) models have been in use for almost 15 years now and have undergone a number of developments. Built on the foundation of traditional capture-recapture models, SCR models have advanced rapidly since their inception. Initially, SCR models provided a way for researchers to incorporate spatially referenced capture information from trap arrays, allowing for model-based estimates of density (removing the need to calculate effective sampling areas post-hoc). Closed population SCR models were quickly expanded to Cormack-Jolly-Seber and Jolly-Seber approaches to allow estimation of survival and recruitment in a spatially explicit framework. With explicit incorporation of spatial capture information, SCR models have also been developed to further explore how animals use space and select resources. More aspects of movement have been included such as incorporating models of how animals’ activity centers move over time and consideration for how animal movement is impacted by landscape connectivity. The timing of SCR model developments has paired well with the advancements of non-invasive data collection methods including camera trapping, genetic sampling, and acoustics. In this talk, I will take you along on a journey with SCR models – from what I view as their start to the latest developments and some thoughts on the future of SCR. We’ll stop along the way to explore interesting applications and to discuss trends in SCR models.
Statistical ecology, hidden Markov models and the management of large carnivores in EuropeLarge carnivores (bears, wolves, lynx and wolverines) are difficult to monitor in the field: they are elusive and live at low densities over wide areas. With their recent recovery in Europe, large carnivores are having increasing interactions with human activities. In this talk, I will illustrate how our team (https://human- animal-interactions.github.io/) and collaborators contribute with statistical ecology to the management of large carnivores in Europe. I will showcase inference about large carnivores’ abundance, demography and distribution by applying and developing hidden Markov models that make relevant use of available and noisy data. I will also talk about how model outcomes can be used in making scenarios and decisions about large carnivores’ management

Conservation projects in Africa: How effective are we?The African continent is home to a vast array of biodiversity; it boasts several centres of endemism, some of the world’s largest terrestrial migrations, bountiful freshwater and marine resources, verdant tropical forests, and productive grasslands. In 2022, these natural resources support the livelihoods of nearly 1.4 billion people, with this expected to increase to ~2.5 billion people by 2050. Meeting the needs of this rapidly growing population will require escalating investment in infrastructure development and agricultural expansion, all against a backdrop of climate change and current biodiversity loss that threaten human health and safety, food and water security, and socio-economic development. In short, we need to make good policy decisions, invest resources wisely, and implement effective projects to ensure the long-term sustainability of Africa’s natural resources, guarantee their continued value to future generations, and achieve global conservation targets. Faced with these challenges, how do governments and civil society actors ensure that they use the scarce resources allotted to biodiversity conservation wisely and efficiently? Are we doing the right projects? How much impact do they have? Do they represent the best use of our time and resources? And what about factors beyond our control? In this talk, I will use case studies from southern Africa to illustrate some of the challenges in doing effective conservation and some of the things we can do about them.

Species interactions and movement: modeling environmental effects on community dynamicsUnderstanding how communities respond to environmental change is frustrated by the fact that both species interactions and movement affect biodiversity in unseen ways. To evaluate the contributions of species interactions on community growth, dynamic models that are capable of capturing non-linear responses to the environment and the redistribution of species across a spatial range are required. We develop a time-series framework that models the effects of environment-species interactions as well as species-species interactions on population growth within a community. We adopt a hierarchical Bayesian approach, enabling probabilistic uncertainty quantification in the model parameters. Novel aspects of our model include allowing for species redistribution across a spatial region, and addressing the issue of zero inflation where data exhibit a high incidence of zeros. To evaluate the impacts of interactions and movement on population growth, we apply our model using citizen science data through eBird, a global citizen science database dedicated to birds. To do so, we also present a novel method of aggregating the spatially biased eBird data collected at point-level. Using illustrative regions in North Carolina and Virginia, we model communities of six bird species. The results provide evidence of non-linear responses to interactions with the environment and other species, and demonstrate a pattern of strong intraspecific competition coupled with many weak interspecific species interactions. Stability analysis suggests that extrinsic forces beyond the components incorporated in the model provide assistance in regulating the system. A separate application to Northeast Fisheries Science Center trawl data demonstrates a method of learning how environmental change impacts redistribution of fish populations.
Accounting for preferential sampling in longitudinal occupancy modelsPreferential sampling (PS) is a form of nonrandom sampling where the "value" of a unit affects the probability with which it is surveyed. PS is a major challenge for the analysis of opportunistically collected biodiversity data including virtually all citizen-science data: ignoring PS can seriously bias all inferences.However, our understanding of PS is still in its infancy. We developed dynamic occupancy models that account for PS and analyzed population trends of Swiss Eagle owls (Bubo bubo) in a nationwide survey over 20 years (2002–2021). We used JAGS to fit a joint PS/multistate occupancy model with two presence states (single bird, pair), where the estimated presence in year t, for both presence states combined, was used as a predictor in the probability that a territory was surveyed in year t+1. We stratified all parameters by six regions, since anecdotal evidence suggested different population trends in different parts of the country.We estimated a strongly positive effect of previous presence on visitation probability, i.e., strongly positive PS. Our joint model that accounted for PS identified stable to strongly increasing population trends in all six regions, and for single bird- and territories occupied by pairs alike. In contrast, trends in the raw data, as well under a PS-naive occupancy model, suggested stable or even declining populations. Our study emphasizes the importance of accounting for non-random sampling in analyses of biodiversity data. In particular, it provides a powerful solution to the problem of PS in the important context of longitudinal occupancy models.
Assessing the contribution of outlier individuals to landscape connectivity with spatial capture-recapture models and finite mixturesWith increasing fragmentation and habitat loss, maintaining connectivity is a challenge to ensure the persistence of wide-ranging animal populations. However, this key process remains difficult to measure. Recently spatial capture-recapture (SCR) models have been developed using ecological distance to allow the simultaneous estimation of density and connectivity. Like in any capture-recapture model, a challenge is to deal with individual heterogeneity, e.g. to consider individual variation in home-range size. When the source of heterogeneity is known, it is easy to account for individual heterogeneity in SCR models by using specific parameters, for males and females for example. Still, some residual heterogeneity that cannot be defined by a priori ecological knowledge is challenging to accommodate. Indeed, some outlier individuals can display relatively long intra-annual movement compared to most of the surveyed population. The inclusion of these individuals in the analysis can lead to an overestimation of home-range size, and cause problems for inferences on density. However, when it comes to connectivity, individuals with a larger home-range are key to make links between distant patches. We propose to use finite mixtures into SCR models to evaluate the contribution of long-distance movements in maintaining landscape connectivity. Home-range size is related to a scale parameter, which controls the shape of the detection probability. Our model allows estimating different scale parameters when the source of heterogeneity is unknown. The population is divided into several hidden classes to which individuals are assigned based on data. We carry out a simulation study to assess the performances of our proposal. Also, as a case study, we focused on the endangered Pyrenean brown bear population. We show that a few males moving across the Pyrenees ensure connectivity between two core areas.
Modeling the presence and spread of aquatic invasive species using an integrated-network modelSeveral challenges arise when developing species distribution models, particularly for invasives. Most species distribution models focus on environmental conditions (e.g., temperature, pH) and species-level tolerances. Yet, the distribution of invasive species depends heavily on colonization dynamics and vectors of spread, such as boater traffic in aquatic systems. Other challenges include imperfect detection and spatially varying sampling biases associated with areas that are easy to access or close to human population centers. We develop a network model that addresses these challenges by integrating multiple data sets to inform parameters that quantify propagule pressure and establishment probabilities while also adjusting for imperfect detection and spatially-varying-sampling biases. We fit the model to 11 years of Eurasian watermilfoil (Myriophyllum spicatum) data collected using both opportunistic and systematic surveys in Minnesota between 2007 and 2018. We show how the model can be used to estimate prevalence rates, identify lakes likely to have invasives that are not yet detected, and to forecast transition probabilities.Lastly, we discuss how a similar model structure could be adapted to other species distribution models, allowing researchers to quantify dynamics near the edge of current species ranges.
On the efficiency and heterogeneity of time-to-detection occupancy modelsTime-to-detection data contains information on the observation process and is usually regarded to lead to better inference about occupancy. We explore the gain in efficiency obtained from time-to-detection data and show that the time-to-detection occupancy model has a significant benefit for estimating the parameters related to the detection probability. However, for the estimation of the occupancy probability parameter, the efficiency improvement is generally very minor.We further extend the standard used exponential time-to-detection model to account for detection heterogeneity. We propose a mixed exponential time-to-detection occupancy model that can be viewed as the result of a mixed Poisson process. The model takes analogous flexibility of the negative binomial regression model for count data analysis. Moreover, the results obtained by analyzing 63 bird species data from the Karoo region of South Africa show it is generally more suitable than conventional methods. Finally, we also investigate the effects of ignoring the heterogeneity of detection intensity in the time-to-detection model. This is a joint work with Dinusha Priyadarshani, Res Altwegg, and Alan T.K. Lee.
Circular-Linear Copulae for Animal Movement DataAnimal movement is often modeled in discrete time, formulated in terms of steps taken between locations at regular time intervals. Steps are characterized by the distance between successive locations (step lengths) and changes in direction (turn angles). Animals commonly exhibit a mix of directed movements with large step lengths and turn angles near 0 when traveling between habitat patches and more wandering movements with small step lengths and uniform turn angles when foraging. Thus, step lengths and turn angles will typically be cross-correlated.Most models of animal movement assume that step lengths and turn angles are independent, likely due to a lack of available alternatives. We show how circular-linear copulae that are symmetric in the circular dimension can be used to fit multivariate distributions that allow for correlated step lengths and turn angles.We present and derive several new circular-linear copulae with this property and demonstrate how they are implemented in our new R-package cylcop to model animal movements in discrete time. We fit distributions with correlation structures described by these copulae to data collected on fishers (Pekania pennanti). With this approach, we are able to capture the inherent correlation in the data and provide a better fit than a model that assumes independence.We see many opportunities to extend this approach and to integrate it into existing frameworks for modeling animal movement and habitat selection. For example, copulae could be used to more accurately sample available locations when conducting habitat-selection analyses.
Acoustic spatial capture-recapture animal density estimatesSpatial capture-recapture (SCR) models can be used to estimate animal density with acoustic survey data. However, SCR models traditionally estimate call density, then convert it to animal density via an independent estimate of call rate. Although it is possible to simultaneously estimate call density and call rate from a single acoustic survey alone, the only published acoustic SCR model assumes that animals remain stationary for the survey period. This assumption is particularly restrictive because many species move between calls. For example, acoustic surveys of gibbon groups often span multiple days, and these groups can call from a different location within their territories each day.In this talk, I will present recent work on allowing movement between detected calls in acoustic SCR models, focusing on the application to gibbon calling surveys. This updated acoustic SCR model includes a bivariate- Normal distribution to allow call location dispersal about a territory location. I will then present how the updated model performs in estimating animal density, and other SCR model parameters, compared to other acoustic SCR models. Lastly, I discuss how this extension can facilitate animal movement modelling using the detected calls in an acoustic SCR context.
Modeling the invasion risk of Bactrocera zonata (Saunders) (Diptera Tephritidae) in the African continent under current and future climatic conditionsInvasions by fruit flies (Diptera: Tephritidae) such as Bactrocera zonata (Saunders) continue to threaten horticulture in tropical and subtropical countries resulting in substantive economic losses. Due to the huge damages B. zonata inflicts in its native and invaded areas, there is need for improved methods for predicting areas of its potential invasion and establishment for early intervention and control. Thus, in this study, we employed the maximum entropy (MaxEnt) species distribution modeling algorithm to predict the potential climatic suitability of B. zonata in Africa under current climate and four future Representative Concentration Pathways (RCPs) for the year 2050. Bioclimatic variables were used as predictors in the MaxEnt models together with native and invaded confirmed occurrence records of B. zonata. Probability of occurrencederived from the MaxEnt models were merged with data on B. zonata’s available host extracted from the Spatial Production Allocation Model (MapSPAM) to map areas potentially more vulnerable to B. zonata invasion. All MaxEnt models for both current and future climate change scenarios had AUC values greater than 0.92, indicating satisfactory performances of the models. Mean temperature of the coldest quarter, precipitation of driest month and temperature seasonality significantly influenced the potential establishment of B. zonata. The models indicated high climatic suitability in tropical and subtropical areas in Africa, including areas where the fruit fly has already been recorded. Suitable areas were predicted in West, East and Central Africa. Future climatic scenario models, RCP 4.5 and 8.5 show significant potential range expansion of B. zonata in Western Sahara, while RCP 4.5 highlighted expansion in Southern Africa as well.Contrarily, RCP 2.6 showed considerable decrease in B. zonata range expansion in Central, East and West Africa. There was increased climatic suitability of B. zonata in Egypt under RCP 6.0. In Madagascar, Angola, Mozambique, and Zambia suitable habitats were detected under RCP4.5. In Libya, Egypt, Sudan, Chad, Niger, Mali, Mauritania, Western Sahara we predicted areas less vulnerable to the potential establishment of B. zonata. Our findings can help to guide biosecurity agencies in decision-making and enhance management strategies for the containment of the pest.
Africa-wide elephant poaching associated with poor governance, limited law enforcement capacity, low human development, and global ivory priceThe illegal wildlife trade is one of the highest value illicit trade sectors globally, threatening both human well-being and biodiversity. African elephant populations declined by ~30% between 2007 and 2014 due largely to ivory poaching, with significant development and security implications for African states. The programme for Monitoring the Illegal Killing of Elephants (MIKE) collates data from over 60 Protected Areas (sites) across Africa (2002-2020). Poaching levels are summarised for each site and year as the proportion of all elephant carcasses detected (mostly by rangers) that were illegally killed (PIKE). We collaborated with the MIKE programme to identify socio-economic and ecological factors/covariates that may explain variation in African elephant poaching levels (PIKE) across sites and over time. We seek to build upon similar previous work by using new covariate data and modified methods. We conducted an extensive literature review to identify covariates that may plausibly drive, facilitate, motivate, or curb elephant poaching, and fed covariates with higher plausibility and data quality into our statistical model. We used a Bayesian hierarchical Generalised Linear Mixed Model to match the data hierarchy (sites within countries, and years within sites) and the binomial PIKE metric. Our use of site, year, country, and site-year random effects and LASSO-regularisation (a form of model selection that shrinks estimated covariate effects) helped minimize type 1 errors, which are common in large covariate analyses like ours. Observed elephant poaching (as represented by PIKE) tended to be lower in countries with better governance quality, at sites with better law enforcement capacity, and at sites where adjacent households are wealthier and healthier (90% credible intervals for covariate effects do not include zero). The yearly trend in in PIKE was strongly associated with the estimated annual trend in the global price of elephant ivory. We conservatively concluded that armed conflict intensity was not significantly associated with PIKE, though we did find some evidence for an effect. We found no evidence for effects on PIKE of precipitation, vegetation density, elephant population size and density, site accessibility, and site area (km2). The presenter will discuss what our results mean for elephant conservation.
Bayesian Identifiability in Ecological ModelsAlthough it has been noted that identifiability presents no problem in a Bayesian framework (Lindley, 1971), non-identifiability may still be an issue. Non-identifiability can lead to poor mixing (Carlin and Louis, 2000) and little Bayesian Learning (Xie and Carlin, 2006). A commonly used check for Bayesian weak identifiability is to compare the overlap between the prior and posterior (Gimenez et al, 2009).In this talk we explain how and why this method does not always work. For example, in an integrated population model including census and capture-recapture data, presented in Abadi et al (2010), the productivity and immigration parameters are confounded – both are non-identifiable. However, only the productivity parameter has a large overlap between the prior and posterior. This leads to the incorrect conclusion that only the productivity parameter is weakly identifiable.We show how a targeted sensitivity analysis can be used diagnose this problem. This involves considering different priors for the weakly identifiable parameter. A confounded parameter will be sensitive to changes in the prior, whereas identifiable parameters will not.We recommend that either the identifiability of a model is explored before carrying out a Bayesian analysis (see, for example, Cole, 2020), or that examining the prior and posterior overlap is combined with a targeted sensitivity analysis. Otherwise, any biological conclusions could be misleading.Understand Observer’s behavior in Citizen science data collection to better correct for sampling biasIn recent years, the increase of data availability with citizen science campaigns have raised questions on its quality. An observer’s record is part of a sample of potential observations from a species true distribution in space. Species distribution models (SDMs) can be severely impacted by non-random spatial distribution of records. Multiple methods exist to correct for spatial bias such as background modification, modelling of the bias or data modification. Most methods imply that the sampling is uneven in space and determined by the observers’ choices of where to search for observations. Road networks are often presented as the cause of presence only data bias such that observers do not deviate far from road networks in making observations. One common correction method is to calculate distances to the road network as a proxy for the bias and correcting for this bias by setting the modelled covariate equal to a common value (Warton et al., 2013).However, this correction implies that each observer behaves in the same manner, which in practice may not be the case. We can differentiate two common observer behaviors: exploring and following. Under this paradigm, explorers do not always follow the road network and will seek to observe species in new places far away from other observations. By contrast, followers will target observations close to already observed species locations and will stay closer to the road network. As such, it is worth investigating whether the Warton et al approach to correcting for observer bias holds under varying observer behaviors, or whether a data-driven approach based on modelled observer behavior may lead to better predictions. To do so, we used the new software platform obsimulator developed by Dr Panu Somervuo (University of Helsinki) to simulate patterns of points driven by observer behavior. We developed two correction methods based on the Warton et al. approach, that use k-nearest neighbours and density calculation to evaluate the sampling bias correction for different observer behavior.
Long-term social network analysis of large herbivore species in an African savanna landscapeInterspecific social networks are an essential part of the structure and functions of many communities and understanding the formation is critical to natural resource management and conservation. These networks can determine how herbivore populations and communities grow, function and respond to environmental changes. Our study draws on five decades of monitoring the 8500 square-kilometre Amboseli ecosystem in southern Kenya, to present a multi-species social network analysis of twenty large herbivores modelled within a 5 by 5 KM grid system. The analysis is implemented using machine learning schemes. The species include wild and domestic herbivores comprising of grazers, browsers and mixed feeders. Herbivores can group for reasons ranging from seasonal resource selectivity based on quality and quantity, to predator avoidance. The results point to interspecies social network connections that are likely to change with increased human influence shaping the ecosystem. The multispecies network model also provides a strong basis for mapping long-term animal characteristics that eventually leads to deeper understanding of species behavior and the significance of space and mobility in alleviating the ecological disruption of compressed populations.
Integrated community occupancy models: A framework to assess occurrence and biodiversity dynamics using multiple data sourcesThe occurrence and distributions of wildlife populations and communities are shifting as a result of global changes. To evaluate whether these shifts are negatively impacting biodiversity processes, it is critical to monitor the status, trends, and effects of environmental variables on entire communities. However, modeling the dynamics of multiple species simultaneously can require large amounts of diverse data, and few modeling approaches exist to simultaneously provide species and community level inferences. We present an "integrated community occupancy model" (ICOM) that unites principles of data integration and hierarchical community modeling in a single framework to provide inferences on species-specific and community occurrence dynamics using multiple data sources. The ICOM combines replicated and nonreplicated detection-nondetection data sources using a hierarchical framework that explicitly accounts for different detection and sampling processes across data sources. We use simulations to compare the ICOM to previously developed hierarchical community occupancy models and single species integrated distribution models. We then apply our model to assess the occurrence and biodiversity dynamics offoliage-gleaning birds in the White Mountain National Forest in the northeastern USA from 2010-2018 using three independent data sources. Simulations revealed that integrating multiple data sources in the ICOM increased precision and accuracy of species and community level inferences compared to single data source models, although benefits of integration were dependent on the information content of individual data sources (e.g., amount of replication). Compared to single species models, the ICOM yielded more precise species-level estimates. Within our case study, the ICOM had the highest out-of-sample predictive performance compared to single species models and models that used only a subset of the three data sources. The ICOM provides more precise estimates of occurrence dynamics compared to multi-species models using single data sources or integrated single-species models. We further found that the ICOM had improved predictive performance across a broad region of interest with an empirical case study of forest birds. The ICOM offers an attractive approach to estimate species and biodiversity dynamics, which is additionally valuable to inform management objectives of both individual species and their broader communities.
Animal density estimation for unmarked population using spatially explicit modelObtaining abundance and density estimates is crucial for wildlife conservation and management. Capture- recapture (CR) models are popular to obtain such estimates in ecological statistics. CR models often incorporate different sources of heterogeneity such as individual and temporal heterogeneity. The development of spatial capture-recapture (SCR), using an array of traps permits additional spatial density to be estimated. However, standard CR-type models require individual to be uniquely identified which is often infeasible in the practice e.g., camera trap data. Chandler and Royle (2013) extend the mixture model to the SCR case, permitting the estimation of abundance when individuals cannot be uniquely identified. In this model, conditional on the number of individuals in the study are, and their associated activity centers, the number of animals observed at each camera trap in given time interval is assumed to be Poisson. Fitting this model faces two challenges due to the unobserved activity centers and the unknown total individuals.Bayesian-data augmentation is often used in handling the missing information by introducing the upper population limit, i.e. using a super-population approach. However, this algorithm can be (very) slow and exhibit poor mixing so that it does not efficiently scale to larger population/studies. In this work, we develop a new Bayesian model fitting approach that does not require the specification a priori of an upper population limit using a reversible jump approach, and discuss its efficient implementation. We demonstrate the improvements in terms of model fitting via a simulation study before fitting the model to the camera-trap data of the barking deer collected in Ujung Kulon National Park, Indonesia.
A machine learning method for estimating the probability of presence using presence-background data Estimating the prevalence or the absolute probability of presence of a species from presence-background data has become a controversial topic in species distribution modelling. In this paper we propose a new method by combining both statistics and machine learning algorithms that overcomes many of the known existing problems. We have also revisited the popular but highly controversial Lele and Keim (LK) method by evaluating its performance and assessing the RSPF condition it relies on. Simulations show that the LK method is fragile and often fails to give reliable estimates even when its underlying RSPF condition is met. In addition it is shown through simulation studies that when ``local knowledge" is available, the new method proposed here is able to accurately estimate the actual probability of presence, outperforming the LK method regardless of the type of true parametric regression functions used. The new local knowledge condition proposed in this paper introduces and extends the local certainty condition known in the context of machine learning and serves as the more generalised condition for accurately estimating the absolute probability of presence from presence-background data. Our conclusion emphasises that in order to make accurate estimations, any extra information has to come from the data itself rather than from introducing unfounded model assumptions. The latter only renders fragile estimation/prediction of the desired probabilities.
A probabilistic generating process of Citizen Science data: Modelling and Estimation of Parameters.Citizen Science refers to the open engagement of the public in scientific activities. For example, several biodiversity projects encourage regular citizens to report the species they observe. Enabling citizens to feed databases enlarges the spatial coverage and the temporal resolution of biodiversity data. However, it comes at the risk of having biased unstructured sampling designs, information focused on more easily detectable species and misspecification of the species observed, among others.Given the inherent biases to Citizen Science data, making inferences with them needs to account for these biases. In order to do it, we propose a probabilistic generating process of Citizen Science data. It starts by assuming that the true occurrence of species is a Spatial Point Pattern. Then, three typical sources of bias in Citizen Science are regarded as sources of thinning for the true point pattern. These are the sampling process of Citizen Scientists; the detection probability which is characteristic of each species, and the misclassification of the observed species.Our proposed model is general and flexible, providing Citizen Science data analysts with the tools to account for any source of bias in their data. This is made possible by using a Bayesian approach as we aim to make inferences about key parameters that explain the ecological process of each species. We simulate a three- stage thinning procedure for the occurrences of a given species and we will make use of the model we propose to estimate the true ecological parameters as we account for these sources of biases.
A Bayesian state-space nest survival model that incorporates breeding phenology to address unknown age and unknown fate dataReproductive output is a key component driving population dynamics, and understanding this demographic rate is fundamental to the conservation and management of wild populations. Nest survival models have traditionally required knowledge of the age and fate of monitored nests, which can be difficult or impossible to obtain in studies of wild populations due to imperfect observation processes, cryptic life history traits, or variable chick fledging ages. We present a novel approach for estimating reproductive output that accounts for uncertainty in nest age, state, and fate that is useful when either the study design or location of nests precludes observing precisely when nests are initiated, eggs hatch, or chicks fledge, but where repeated observations of parental behavior can provide information about the likely true state of the nest (e.g., when an egg or hatchling is present). We demonstrate the ability of this approach to integrate prior information on species-specific breeding phenology and extend open-population modelling approaches to estimate the total number of nests that produced at least one chick or fledgling. A robust simulation analysis indicated that the precision of daily nest state transition probabilities degrades with decreasing data quality and quantity, but the model framework produced unbiased and precise estimates of stage-specific nest survival and abundance, which are often of greatest ecological interest. We use this model to evaluate the effects of environmental indices on trends in reproductive success for the Pigeon Guillemot (Cepphus columba) in Puget Sound, Washington, USA. The cryptic nesting behavior of this indicator species precludes traditional nest monitoring techniques and demography therefore remains poorly understood. This work extends nest survival modeling techniques, is applicable to other populations with fully or partially unobservable nests, provides the first estimates of demographic rates for this species in the region, and lends insight into the relationship between population dynamics and environmental variability that will be useful for ongoing monitoring and conservation efforts.
Validating hidden Markov models to inform seabird conservationConservation of marine biodiversity is vital for the survival of marine organisms. Anthropogenic activities ranging from over-exploitation, offshore wind-farm, over-fishing are primary threats to marine biodiversity. In addition, seabirds, which are good indicators of the health of marine life, are rapidly declining in population than any other type of bird due to these threats. Also, seabirds are less protected from these threats at sea than they are at the colony. Thus, effective conservation at sea is critical to help address the decline in seabird population and marine biodiversity. Furthermore, knowing seabirds’ behaviour at sea can help in spatial planning and inform conservation management. For instance, foraging behaviour and areas can help to map out marine protected areas (MPAs). However, how do we identify these behaviours?In practice, seabird researchers often use hidden Markov models fitted to seabirds’ GPS tracking data to infer their behaviours since they are directly unobservable from GPS tracking data. However, the challenge with HMMs fitted to GPS movement data is the uncertainty surrounding the inferred behaviours of seabirds. These cannot typically be validated due to the difficulty obtaining directly observed behavioural data of seabirds to serve as a ground truth. As a result, the corresponding MPAs from these inferred areas may be ineffective for conservation if inferred areas are located in the wrong places.We consider a unique dataset provided by the Joint Nature Conservation Committee (JNCC) and obtained via visual tracking of four tern species using a rigid-hulled inflatable boat to tackle this problem. The tracking was conducted in several colonies within the UK during chick-rearing and incubation. The proxy movement data-the GPS location of the boat- and the behavioural data of terns directly observed and recorded by the observers on the boat are provided in the dataset. The project aims to leverage the rare opportunity provided by the unique dataset to validate inferred behaviours from HMMs (representing different biological hypotheses in movement ecology) that will be fitted to the proxy movement data using the observed terns’ behavioural data.
Assessing the success of re-introductions whilst accounting for multi- species populations.In response to the dramatic declines of species diversity and abundance, ecologists are more frequently using conservation and management efforts to restore and promote species populations. One particular method is the translocation or reintroduction of species from one site to another with beneficial outcomes at population, species or ecosystem level (IUCN/SSC, 2013).One key aim of translocating individuals, which is often used as a metric for success, is to re-establish a thriving population into a formerly occupied indigenous habitat (Armstrong & Seddon, 2008). However, the effect of these translocations on the abundance of other species at both the donor and recipient site are often overlooked when determining the success of a reintroduction. One reason for this is that the monitoring of individuals post-reintroduction can vary widely in both intensity and collection methods between species. Hence, metrics of reintroduction success which account for the effect on multiple species require a synthesised method for integrating many data types.When analysing data on multiple species, abundance is often estimated separately for each species. To our knowledge it is not common practice to integrate data types but it holds obvious incentives for extracting more information out of data. We present a multi-species modelling framework for analysing species monitoring data. The methodology, which may be used in the assessment of reintroduction success, allows for data of varying types and collection efforts. We apply this to real reintroduction data of speciesindigenous to Mauritius’ islets which has been provided by the Mauritius Wildlife Foundation.We supplement this work with an Rshiny app aimed at making the methodology accessible to non- statisticians. This will enable the user to analyse data, gather results and obtain more information from data collected from multiple sources. Another possibility would be to provide the user with simulations to forecast species abundance which may be used as evidence in policy management decisions to support reintroduction programmes.
Extented Sampled Posterior P-value as a tool for Joint-Species Distribution Models checkingEcologists use, among other things, Joint-Species Distribution Models (JSDMs) - which are types of Hierarchical Bayesian Models (which are types of Bayesian statistical parametric models defined in function of hyperparameters and unobservable parameters (latent variables)) - are used to model biodiversity hierarchically, i.e. at the level of species, ecological groups and communities of species. This modelling method makes it possible to share environmental information between species while taking into account the correlations between species. However, JSDMs make many mathematical assumptions due to their complex structure and the numerical limitations required to fit them. So doing appopriate Model Checking (which consists of testing the hypotheses made about a statistical parametric model) for these types of models is necessary to obtain greater confidence in the statistical results obtained from the predictions of these models.Extended Internal Goodness-Of-Fit (GOF) p-values - approaches that mix frequentist principles with Bayesian inference, and are based on a method of using the same data used to estimate the model to critique the same model - are an important class of approaches for Hierarchical Bayesian Model checking. Extended Internal GOF p-values are used to quantify the degree of surprise in observed data given the specified data model and prior distribution and which able to check the hypotheses made on the distributions of latent variables of Hierarchical Bayesian Models. In order to assess the quality of JSDMs it is important to use the Extended Internal GOF p-values to assess the goodness of fit between the observed data and the JSDM.We show mathematically that a new Extented Internal GOF p-value, called the "extented sampled posterior p-value" - a type of External Internal GOF p-values, where observed data are compared with multiple replicated data sets where all replicated data are generated from a single parameter drawn from the posterior distribution -, has desirable mathematical properties that make it relevant in very different contexts and has a higher power (to detect lack of fit of the model to the data) than more Extended Internal GOF p-values which are known to be conservative (producing p-values biased toward 0.5) or numerically expensive.
nimbleHMC: Hamiltonian Monte Carlo Sampling with NIMBLEWe present the nimbleHMC R package, which provides Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) sampling for hierarchical models as an extension to the NIMBLE package’s MCMC engine. HMC is a derivative-based MCMC sampling algorithm, which can facilitate rapid exploration of posterior distributions and thus fastmixing of MCMC chains. The nimbleHMC package operates seamlessly within NIMBLE’s MCMC framework, and provides the No-U-Turn (NUTS) variety of HMC. Using nimbleHMC, HMC sampling can be applied to arbitrary subsets of model dimensions and can be used in combination with NIMBLE’s other sampling algorithms. These combinations allow greater flexibility of MCMC methods than is available in many other MCMC packages. In this talk, we explain the functionality and design decisions underlying nimbleHMC, and how HMC sampling can be applied to entire models or subsets of model dimensions. We demonstrate the usage and performance of nimbleHMC using a variety of hierarchical models, including common ecological model structures.
A method to predict connectivity for waterbird species from tracking dataMany waterbird species undertake long-distance flights to access food, nesting habitat and other resources. Conserving species through these long-distance movements is challenging because they cover vast areas, which often makes traditional conservation tools such as permanent reserves infeasible. For some migratory species, long-distance movements are regular and predictable, and there have been recent high- profile conservation successes in providing temporary habitat during their migration. However, for species which undertake nomadic or semi-nomadic movements, the difficulty of predicting where birds will be during large-scale movements remains a barrier to conservation.In this study we outline a statistical method to predict the probability of connectivity between key sites for a partially migratory species, the straw-necked ibis (Threskiornis spinicollis) in the Murray-Darling Basin, Australia. Our method uses 5 years of tracking data with high resolution landscape and weather variables to build a model of the expected distance travelled under environmental scenarios for different movement states, identified by hidden Markov modelling. Weather and landscape water variables are matched to tracked bird locations using downscaled big data sets to replicate the conditions experienced by the birds in flight. We generate least-cost paths between locations of interest (e.g., breeding sites) and simulate the probability that birds can exceed the least cost-distance as a measure of connectivity. The methodseparates static “potential” connectivity, based on landscape features that change slowly, from short-term “realized” connectivity, which captures the factors that have an immediate impact on birds during flight (e.g., wind, weather and local water conditions). We further extend our model by generating short-term forecasts (e.g. 1-3 days) of the probability of bird connectivity given the expected future environmental conditions. Our early results suggest that habitat type becomes less important as birds travel further, and that weather and other environmental variables become dominant for very long-distance movements. Our method provides one of the first ways to predict and forecast the movements of nomadic and partially- nomadic birds, providing a better understanding of how birds use and interact with large landscapes.
Using a Bayesian multi-state mark-recapture model to assess cost of first reproduction and influence of entanglement on recruitment in female North Atlantic right whalesRecruitment and age at first parturition are often estimated from sighting histories. Multi-state mark- recapture models have been used to provide estimates, albeit traditionally the state of an individual when sighted is assumed to be known with some certainty. Yet for many marine mammals certainty is not possible, because reproductive events can be missed. We developed a Bayesian multi-state mark-recapture model with state uncertainty in the observation process to account for uncertain breeding state assignment and imperfect detections. This model, based upon the multi-event framework, provides a flexible structure to estimate reproductive parameters, while accounting for the influence of sub-lethal stressors. By including individuals with state uncertainty, we are able to increase the sample size, thus improving the precision in estimating demographic parameters, which is important when dealing with small, declining populations.Using Stan we constructed and fit the model using 41 years of sighting histories for 199 known age female North Atlantic right whales. The aim was to assess 1) the age specific costs of first reproduction, and 2) how entanglement in fishing gear and birth cohort influence recruitment. Individuals were assigned to one of four observational states (pre-breeder, first-time breeder, unknown breeding state, or experienced breeder), with additional covariate information of age class (0-17+), entanglement score (minor, moderate, severe, and no entanglement), and cohort: 1) born prior to 2000, and 2) born in 2000 or after. Using this framework we estimated survival and transition (i.e. recruitment) probabilities. We found a higher cost of first reproduction for both younger and older first-time breeders with lower apparent survival, compared to individuals who commenced breeding 8-11 years of age. Individuals born after 2000 had a reduced chance of recruiting to breeder, and females who had a minor entanglement during recruitment had the lowest transition probability, regardless of when they were born. Our model allowed us to show for the first time that for North Atlantic right whales female recruitment to breeding is reduced in females born this century, and that even minor entanglements significantly impact recruitment to the breeding population.
Two-sex Integrated Population Model Reveals Differences in Life History Strategies for Female and Male Cooper’s Hawks (Accipiter cooperii)Integrated population models (IPMs) combine population counts with demographic data to improve the precision of estimates of population size and demographic rates. IPMs can also provide information on demographic parameters for which data are lacking (e.g., immigration), if other sufficient information is available. IPMs are structured around a matrix population model that reflects the life cycle of the species.IPMs often use demographic data from one sex, usually females, implicitly assuming the chosen sexadequately represents the species’ life history; for highly size-dimorphic raptors, that assumption may not hold true. We developed a two-sex IPM for a New Mexico population of the highly size-dimorphic Cooper’s Hawk using data from 2011–2020 and compared estimates of life history characteristics between sexes.Because we had data to directly estimate sex- and age-specific probabilities of breeding, fecundity, survival, brood sex ratios, and emigration rates, we could indirectly estimate age-specific immigration rates for both sexes. Our two-sex IPM revealed that population growth was most strongly associated with increased immigration and decreased first-year (FY) emigration in females but with after-first-year (AFY) survival in males. Most males that recruited as new breeders on our study area were AFY residents, whereas most female recruits were AFY immigrants. All females fledged on our study area that survived bred in their first year, whereas only 3% of FY males bred. We found evidence of density dependence in survival of AFY males (r = -0.11, 95% credible interval (CRI) = -0.36 – -0.03), but only marginal evidence of density dependence in AFY female immigration (r = -0.02, 95% CRI = -0.10 – 0.01). Our findings reveal that male and femaleCooper’s Hawks differ in their response to population density, and in how they contribute to population growth. Thus, sexual differences in vital rates can be an important consideration in raptor population models.
Integrating datasets to improve estimates of species distribution and abundance using non-linear models and a mean-dispersion parameterization of the Beta distributionThe increasing number and availability of ecological datasets motivates the development of methods for integrating datasets from different sources over the same spatial or temporal domain. In theory, combining the information in different datasets can improve the accuracy and precision of model estimates and predictions, but differences in format, scale, and sampling methodology must be appropriately accounted for in the modeling process. In this work, we develop an integrated distribution and abundance model for a vegetation community in Yellowstone National Park, USA, using vegetation cover class data from the National Park Service (NPS) Inventory Monitoring Program and percent cover data from the National Ecological Observation Network (NEON). The spatial extent of the NEON data is contained within the spatial extent of the NPS data, is more densely sampled, and contains information at a finer grain (percent cover) than the NPS data (cover class). We develop a calibration model in which we use the NEON data to adjust the estimates of distribution and mean abundance generated by the NPS dataset. After calibrating the data, we use a joint-likelihood approach to estimate spatial distribution and abundance in the context of a generalized additive model optimized using MCMC methods. Because the joint likelihood is in the form of a mean-dispersion parameterization of the Beta distribution, we directly model the response surface for the mean, and derive precision estimates from Bayesian posteriors. Results from our study can be used to inform management practices in the national park, and the technique we develop can be broadly applied to integrate two common forms of vegetation data: ordinal cover class and percent cover.
Effects of including community-level or species-specific data on the performances of a Joint Species Distribution Model: a case study with a species-rich marine benthic communitiesUnderstanding and predicting the variability of species communities remain a major challenge in ecology. Relative to single species distribution models, Joint Species Distribution Models (JSDM) offer an improvement to characterise community variability as all species abundances or occurrences are modelled jointly. In JSDM, species can share similar responses to environmental conditions based on their phylogenetic or functional traits similarities. In addition to environmental filtering, recent development in JSDM can also characterise species responses to missing abiotic and biotic predictors by estimating species correlation at community-level through latent variables. Thus, the explanatory and predictive power of JSDM can increase thanks to: (1) additional species-specific information such as phylogeny or functional trait data, or (2) inclusion of abundance or occurrence of non-target species.Here, we tested the influence on JSDM performances of including species-specific information or data about non-target species. Focusing on a target assemblage of 99 bristle worm species out of total of 278 benthic species sampled across 21 sites along the French Atlantic coast over 9 years, we fitted alternative model structures using the HMSC framework. Each of 3 alternative structures (1) with phylogeny, (2) with phylogeny and functional traits and (3) with the 278 species were fitted using abundance and occurrence data. We assessed their performances relative to a baseline model that only considers the 99 bristle worm species without phylogeny nor functional traits.Our results suggest that inclusion of phylogenetic or trait information does not improve model abilities to predict bristle worms occurrences and abundances. However, models explanatory and predictive abilities for bristle worms occurrences and abundance do improve when including information about the 179 non- target species. Thus, inclusion of non-target species in the model seems more informative than adding traits or phylogeny data. Moreover, this performance gain comes at a cost as the computational time and the RAM needed to fit the model exponentially increase with the number of species included in the model.Since these conclusions only rely on a single species-rich marine dataset, similar applications to other case studies will be needed to confirm these findings.
Spatially correlated step selection analysisStep selection analysis is a common framework to understand animal movement using telemetry data. It is used in the context of understanding resource selection. Currently, a very popular method is Integrated Step Selection Analysis (iSSA). Despite being a robust and logical approach, this methoddoes not fully take the spatial nature of the data generating process into consideration. In practice, ignoring the spatial structure of the data can lead to violating the independence assumption of the model leading to confounding conclusions.In most situations, the whole spatial variation of the data can not be explained exclusively by the fixed effects. This is the case because in practice, a researcher can not be certain about what truly leads to animal movement decisions. Thus, the remaining unexplained spatial variation causesspatial correlation. For this reason, we incorporate spatial random effects in the model with help of a Gaussian Process (GP). This is achieved using the Bayesian inference framework R-INLA and the Stochastic Partial Differential Equations (SPDE) technique. In addition, we show through asimulation the consequences of not being able to account for the whole spatial variation with the fixed effects and how this can be fixed by implementing spatial random effects in the model. This method can not only be applied for iSSA but also for its extension time-varying iSSA (tiSSA).
Acoustic biodiversityPassive acoustic recordings of the environment are relatively cheap and easy to obtain, so there is considerable contemporary interest in using acoustic recordings to monitor biodiversity and ecosystem health. Sound files are typically summarised using a suite of acoustic indices that measure attributes such as acoustic diversity and richness. However, where the aim is to monitor biodiversity, the analyst is faced with a bewildering choice of which acoustic indices to use, and no guarantee that any of them correlate robustly with biodiversity. We seek a more general and robust framework to assess biodiversity and abundance using acoustic recordings.In this talk we outline a new data-driven approach to monitoring biodiversity through a panel of acoustic indices. In addition to simulation results, we show how our method succeeds in distinguishing between biodiversity within and outside of a marine reserve based solely on underwater recordings, despite these distinctions not being clear from inspection of the constituent acoustic indices.
A hierarchical modeling approach for environmental DNA metabarcoding: inference of species detection process, site occupancy, and study designEnvironmental DNA (eDNA) metabarcoding is an emerging technology for gauging the distribution and diversity of species. Compared to the traditional survey methods such as capturing or sighting individuals, species detection by eDNA metabarcoding can be more sensitive. Nevertheless, the detection of species using eDNA metabarcoding is yet imperfect, owing to various factors that can cause false negatives in the inherent multistage workflow. False negatives in the multistage workflow of eDNA metabarcoding also complicate the identification of the ideal allocation of resources among the different stages in optimizing research efficiency. To address these issues, we propose a variant of the multispecies site occupancy model for eDNA metabarcoding studies, where samples are collected at multiple sites within a region of interest. In contrast to traditional site occupancy models with a binomial (or Bernoulli) observation model, this model employs a multinomial observation model to describe the variation in sequence read counts, the output of the high-throughput sequencers. It explicitly accounts for the hierarchical workflow of eDNA metabarcoding and interspecific heterogeneity and allows the analysis of the sources of variation in the detectability of species throughout the different stages of the workflow. The model can also be used to identify the study design that optimizes the effectiveness of species detection using a Bayesian decision analysis approach. An application of the model to freshwater fish communities in the Lake Kasumigaura watershed in Japan highlighted a remarkable inhomogeneity in the detectability of species, indicating a potential risk of the biased detection of specific species. Species with lower site occupancy probabilities tended to be difficult to detect as they had lower capture probabilities and fewer sequence reads. A study design analysis suggested that ensuring multiple within-site replications of the environmental samples is preferred to achieve higher species detection effectiveness, provided that tens of thousands of sequence reads were secured per replicate. These results suggest that the use of hierarchical models that explicitly account for the inherent multistage process of species detection in eDNA metabarcoding makes the application of eDNA metabarcoding more error-tolerant and allows ecologists to monitor ecological communities more efficiently.
Sharing detection heterogeneity information among species in community models of occupancy and abundance can strengthen inferenceThe estimation of abundance and distribution and factors governing patterns in these parameters is central to the field of ecology. The continued development of hierarchical models that best utilize available information to inform these processes is a key goal of quantitative ecologists. However, much remains to be learned about simultaneously modeling true abundance, presence, and trajectories of ecological communities. Simultaneous modeling of the population dynamics of multiple species provides an interesting mechanism to examine patterns in community processes and, as we emphasize herein, to improve species-specific estimates by leveraging detection information among species. Here we demonstrate a simple but effective approach to share information about observation parameters among species in hierarchical community abundance and occupancy models, where we use shared random effects among species to account for spatiotemporal heterogeneity in detection probability. We demonstrate the efficacy of our modeling approach using simulated abundance data, where we recover well our simulated parameters using N-mixture models. Our approach substantially increases precision in estimates of abundance compared to models that do not share detection information among species. We then expand this model, and apply it to repeated detection/non-detection data collected on six species of tits (Paridae) breeding at 119 1 km sq. sampling sites across a P. montanus hybrid zone in northern Switzerland (2004- 2020). We find strong impacts of forest cover and elevation on population persistence and colonisation in all species. We also demonstrate evidence for interspecific competition on population persistence and colonization probabilities, where the presence of marsh tits reduces population persistence and colonisation probability of sympatric willow tits, potentially decreasing gene flow among willow tit subspecies. While conceptually simple, our results have important implications for the future modeling of population abundance, colonization, persistence, and trajectories in community frameworks. We suggest potential extensions of our modeling in this paper, and discuss how leveraging data from multiple species can improve model performance and sharpen ecological inference.
Large Data and Complex Ecological Models: When Worlds CollideWe consider the challenges that arise when fitting complex ecological models to "large'' data sets. In particular we consider capture-recapture data where random effect (or hierarchical) models are commonly used to represent individual heterogeneity, often present in ecological populations under study. In general these models lead to a likelihood that is expressible only as an analytically intractable integral. Common techniques for fitting such models to data include, for example, the use of direct numerical approximations for the integral, or a Bayesian data augmentation approach. However, as the size of the data set increases (i.e. the number of individuals increases), these computational tools may become computationally infeasible. We present an efficient Bayesian model-fitting approach, whereby we initially sample from the posterior distribution of a smaller subsample of the data, before correcting this sample to obtain estimates of the posterior distribution of the full dataset, using an importance sampling approach. We consider several practical issues, including the subsampling mechanism, computational efficiencies (including the ability to parallelise the algorithm) and combining multiple subsampling estimates using multiple subsampled datasets. An empirical simulation study for an individual heterogeneity capture-recapture model demonstrates the approach provides reliable posterior estimates but at a substantially reduced computational cost compared to a standard Bayesian data augmentation approach. The method is subsequently applied to a population of approximately 30,000 ringed guillemots, where we specify an additive logistic model for the survival probabilities allowing for age, time and individual heterogeneity.Fitting the model using standard Bayesian data augmentation techniques are infeasible, yet our new approach provides consistent posterior estimates in the order of a couple of hours (or less).
A multi-species co-occurrence index to avoid Type II errors in null model testingPairwise species co-occurrence metrics along with community matrix randomization algorithms have been widely used in null model testing to detect significant signals of species association or dissociation and infer different types of biotic interactions between species (e.g. facilitative or antagonistic). However, these tests ignore co-occurrence patterns involving multiple species simultaneously, which could reflect functional guilds or motifs composed of multiple species within the community. Null model tests without considering multi-species co-occurrence could lead to false negatives (Type II error) in detecting non-random forces at play. Here, we present a new, multi-species co-occurrence index that quantifies the joint occupancy of two or more species simultaneously in a community. We derive the mean and variance of the proposed joint occupancy index to facilitate testing for statistical significance in observed co-occurrence patterns. Using this joint occupancy index along with standard randomization algorithms in null model testing, we identify nine possible archetypes of multi-species co-occurrence. The application of the index to a large database of 289 species-by-site community matrices reveals that some archetypes are more frequent than others, four archetypes not being observed. We show that null model testing using pairwise co-occurrence metrics could indeed lead to severe Type II errors in two specific archetypes. As such, we recommend and advocate for the use of the proposed joint occupancy index for null-model-based inference of species association and biotic interactions.
Invisible biodiversity: widespread extinction debts and colonization credits in US bird communitiesLandscape modifications are a major source of biodiversity change, but species responses to land cover change are not instantaneous. Extinctions and colonisations may take a long time to occur, leading to extinction debts and colonisation credits. If unaccounted for, debts and credits can lead to erroneous predictions of future biodiversity that may misinform conservation actions. Current attempts to measure debts and credits are limited in their spatial/temporal scale and do not consider multiple facets of landscape composition and history. Here, we develop a Bayesian model in order to quantify the relative contribution of past and current landscapes on the current effective number of species in 2880 US bird communities.Furthermore, we explicitly measure the biodiversity magnitude of these delayed responses to increases and decreases of five land cover types. We find that the current effective number of species is still largely explained by the past landscape composition, and thus that there are widespread extinction debts and colonisation credits. The extent of these legacy effects depends on the type, directionality and magnitude of recent land cover change. Specifically, we reveal debts across 52% of the US, particularly in recently urbanised areas, and colonisation credits in the remaining 48%, which were primarily associated with grassland decrease. We conclude that biodiversity policy targets risk being obsolete unless past landscapes are considered and debts and credits accounted for.
Identifying engaging bird species and traits with community science dataBirders and amateur naturalists engage with different bird species at different rates. Quantifying these species-specific observer biases can inform the impact and efficacy of conservation outreach and the scientific use of community collected biodiversity data. Species that are thought to be “charismatic” or more engaging are often prioritized in conservation, and previous researchers have used sociological experiments and digital records to estimate charisma indirectly. We developed methods to estimate species engagement directly from citizen science data as a relative reporting rate between iNaturalist and eBird data across the continental USA. We assume eBird complete checklists represent the rates at which species-agnostic observers detect each species, whereas the more opportunistic iNaturalist data represent selective engagements based on user preference and logistical factors such as site selection and observer skill. Wedefine an “overreporting index” for each species as the geographic median log difference between iNaturalist and eBird reporting rates. The spatiotemporal scale of these data raise several challenges. To accommodate spatial correlation, we estimate spatial surfaces of user engagement as generalized additive models (GAMs) for each of 472 species of birds across the contiguous United States in each data set. To accommodate other sources of heterogeneity, we use quasibinomial responses. To propagate uncertainty from the GAMs to uncertainty in the overreporting index for subsequent analysis, we quantify first-stage uncertainty with bootstrapping, then use a mixed effects meta-analysis across species. In the meta-analysis, we ask whether iNaturalist users engage more with larger, more colorful, and rarer birds relative to eBird users. We find evidence that, across 472 modeled species, 52 species are significantly overreported and 158 are significantly underreported, indicating a wide variety of species-specific effects. We also find that body mass, color contrast, and range size all predict overreporting in the opportunistic dataset. The two-stage methodology presented for propagating uncertainty from computationally demanding species-specific models to across-species meta-analysis can be customized spatiotemporally and incorporated into other kinds of ecological statistical models. Understanding which bird species are highly engaging can aid conservation and outreach efforts.
Species traits determine the influence of anthropogenically-modified habitats on forest bird occurrence throughout the annual cycleThe conversion of forest to agriculture is considered one of the greatest threats to avian biodiversity. Our current understanding of avian responses to deforestation largely comes from small-scale studies during one stage of the annual cycle. However, both migratory and resident species can vary greatly in the environments they experience and their habitat and resource requirements at different times and locations across the annual cycle, which may impact how they respond to land cover modification. Using data from the eBird community-science program, we investigated associations between anthropogenically-modified land cover and the occurrence of 238 forest birds based on three sets of avian traits: migration strategy, dietary guild, and foraging strategy. We used species distribution models to quantify the importance of human-modified land cover across the Western Hemisphere then assessed how relationships varied among seasons and traits. The importance of modified land cover varied widely across seasons and trait groups, but was generally greatest outside of breeding season and least for omnivores. Neotropical migrants were one notable exception, with modified cover being most important during pre- and post-breeding periods and least during the nonbreeding season. Overall, Neotropical residents and frugivores responded more positively to modified land cover than to natural land cover across the annual cycle. Because our results show that associations with anthropogenically-modified habitats vary widely by season and species groups, management efforts that are based upon broad generalizations may be ineffective.
Volunteer-based monitoring schemes for priority species in Flanders, BelgiumThe Research Institute for Nature and Forests (INBO) and the NGO Natuurpunt recently initiated a set of monitoring schemes for approximately 70 European and Flemish priority species. The aim of these monitoring schemes is to provide reliable information on long term trends in abundance on the scale of Flanders (the northern region of Belgium). This information enables evaluation of policy measures and reporting on the conservation status in the framework of the Habitat Directive.Each monitoring scheme consists of a fixed set of sites in which one or more species are counted based on a standardized protocol. For rare species, all occupied sites are counted, while for more common species a spatially balanced sample is drawn.We follow a citizen-science approach: volunteers can claim a monitoring site and receive detailed instructructions on when and how to count. This approach has already been proven to be successful for the long established bird monitoring schemes in Flanders. However, after six years of monitoring, we can conclude that volunteer based monitoring schemes can also be successful for other species groups, such as amphibians, butterflies, dragonflies and vascular plants.We will present (1) our experiences setting up new monitoring schemes; (2) volunteer participation for different species groups; (3) the modelling approach to analyse the data; and (4) the communication of results.
A GLMM approach for combining relative abundance surfacesSpatio-temporal maps of animal density or relative abundance are fundamental to many applications in conservation and ecology.There are often a number of data sources to inform species maps, including citizen science monitoring programs, geolocation data from satellite-tagged animals, and formal scientific surveys. In these cases, it may be desirable to come up with a single map integrating all data sources.We introduce a two-step method for combining inference about relative abundance maps using multiple data sources. Log-scale relative abundance surfaces are first estimated from individual data sets, and resultant surfaces are then treated as ``data" within a generalized linear mixed model framework with a common mean.Using simulation, we show that our approach frequently outperfoms other approaches, including basing inference on a single surface, or taking a simple arithmetic mean (although the arithmetic mean performs well when there are few surfaces).We demonstrate our method using citizen science and satellite-tracking data of Steller sea lions in Alaska. In this case, relative abundance surfaces consisted of an effort-adjusted map developed from platform-of- opportunity sightings and a utilization distribution developed from geolocation records. Resulting integrated surfaces represented a compromise between single-data source predictions.Our approach should be useful for ecologists seeking to reconcile alternative species distribution maps, particularly in cases where individual surfaces are prone to bias or when there is no obvious common currency (e.g. point process) for a fully integrated analysis.
State-space mark-recapture estimates of regional movement and abundance of Fiordland bottlenose dolphins (Tursiops truncatus)The bottlenose dolphins (terehu, Tursiops truncatus) of Ata Whenua-Fiordland National Park, Aotearoa-New Zealand, form an isolated, critically endangered population near the southern limit of the species’ range.The Doubtful Sound sub-population is one of three recognized in this region, and has been considered resident within the Patea-Doubtful/Te Awa-o-Tu-Thompson complex. Since dedicated annual monitoring began in 1990, abundance estimates have fluctuated between 50 and 80 individuals, with the most recent (2020) estimate being 55 (95% CI: 53–58), a 19% decrease from the year before. The data have previously been analysed as a series of independent, closed population experiments by applying the Lincoln-Petersen estimator with the Chapman modification; however, in at least the last decade, there have been several opportunistic sightings of individuals from this population in neighbouring fiord habitats, including areas not currently considered part of their range. This study considers the capture histories across years and applies state-space mark-recapture open population models within a Bayesian framework to estimate trends in yearly abundance, and to explore movement between different areas where only sparse data exist. Themethods applied here include retrospective yearly captures between an individual’s first and last sighting to provide an informed time-series. Through the use of multiple data streams, we can separately estimate mortality, temporary emigration, and fecundity, and assess the impact that factors such as habitat degradation and demographic stochasticity have on these processes. This study has the potential to inform effective conservation management of Fiordland bottlenose dolphins as impacts from climate change and anthropogenic activities increase in the region.
The R package stelfi for fitting self-exciting spatiotemporal point process modelsEvents cluster in time and space: bees swarm, whales click, spores disperse infecting trees. Temporal and spatial proximity are major factors in the chain reaction of events Yet, the nature of how and why these patterns of events propagate is much more complex. In this talk, I will present my R package stelfi, which fits a number of spatiotemporal point process models that include self-exciting mechanisms.A range of models for spatial, temporal, and spatiotemporal point pattern data are implemented in the package. All models are fitted using automatic differentiation via the R package TMB [1]. This talk will cover the implementation of stelfi models and illustrate their use with real-world examples. To date, the development of spatiotemporal self-exciting point process models has been restricted to the fields of seismology and criminology, where a process is developed for a specific application. This talk will illustrate how such models can be used to model self-exciting mechanisms inherent in many environmental and ecological settings.
Estimating the temporal scale of time series predictors on abundance and occurrenceSpecies abundance and occurrence respond to predictors at different spatial and temporal scales. Methods have emerged that calculate composite predictors across multiple scales by assigning weights to each scale and estimating weights within the model, but model development has focused on spatial scales. Here, we incorporate time series of explanatory variables as composite predictors into models ofabundance/occurrence, estimating weights for each time step as a declining function of ‘time distance’ from the focal year (ie, in which the response variable was measured). We performed a simulation study for abundance/occurrence models with and without imperfect detection, with a composite predictor based on a 10-year annual time series and weights following a half-normal function with temporal scale parameter sigma. We varied effect size of the composite predictor (on the log scale), beta, from 0.5 to 1.3; sigma from 1 to 4; and sample size from 100 to 250.We found that all model types were able to estimate sigma and beta with small average bias in some scenarios. The number of simulations returning estimates and estimate precision decreased, and variability of estimates across simulations increased, in occurrence relative to abundance models, and in models with imperfect detection. Estimates were more accurate as beta increased, and for sigma = 2.5.We applied the occupancy version of the time scale model to snare detection data from two protected areas in Viet Nam, to evaluate how annual snare removal efforts from 2011 to 2018 affected snare occurrence in 2019, while accounting for other static predictors and imperfect snare detection. Prior snare removal efforts negatively affected snare occurrence. Annual weights for prior snare removal effort dropped sharply after year 1, with 98% of all weight concentrated in the first three years prior to 2019; uncertainty in sigma was high.The temporal scale model produced on average unbiased estimates of relationships between composite predictors and state variables, but accuracy of sigma estimates is likely limited by the often coarse (i.e., annual) resolution of predictor time series and, for larger sigma, by time series length.
Model selection for integrated population models: selecting age structure with multiple data typesIntegrated population modelling (IPM) unites different methodologies, such as capture-recapture and time- series models and has the advantage of providing a simultaneous description of all the data, increased precision of parameter estimates and the potential of coherent estimation of parameters otherwise not estimable from individual component analyses alone. An IPM will typically include a state-space model (SSM) component and the SSM structure is determined by a combination of biological considerations, what is observed and a study of the component demographic likelihoods in isolation. However it is natural to consider whether it would be advantageous to determine model structure using a combined likelihood.Selecting age structure in survival using IPMs involves comparing SSMs with different dimensions. Using information criteria approaches is generally inappropriate and I recommend using likelihood ratio tests, highlighting when models of different dimension can be compared using standard chi-square tests. A complex senescence case study of Alpine ibex, Capra ibex, illustrates how the new approach can be used in practice.
Bayesian inference for categorical and censored regression models for phenological dataThe study of phenology has allowed for a better understanding of ecosystem function and the impacts of climate change on animal and plant populations, as well as informing applications such as crop breeding or pest management. Phenological analyses usually focus on the timing of particular events, e.g. dates of first appearance. However, for many phenomena exact dates of particular events are more difficult to observe than the state of the system itself.For example, surveys may record whether a plant is in flower or not, but not the exact date of flowering. Such observations categorize an organism’s state and are often encoded as discrete, ordered classes or (semi-)continuous progression scores. A plethora of statistical models have been developed by ecologists to infer dates of interest from such data, often framed around taxon-specific applications. Many of these models are special cases of more general categorical and/or censored regression models, which can be estimated with general purpose modelling software.I describe parallels between existing modelling approaches and apply Bayesian inference to this class of models. This inference framework allows the inclusion of hierarchical model structures to accommodatee.g. the integration of data sets using different modes of recording, or individual heterogeneity in phenological progression. I show that Bayesian hierarchical models can provide less biased estimates and more accurate uncertainty quantification than existing estimation methods, in particular when sampling assumptions are not fully met. This is a great advantage when applying this class of models to real world data, e.g. from citizen science observation schemes.I present applications with a focus on avian breeding and feather moult phenology, where observational data often comprise a mixture of categorical and continuous scores, as well as state-specific samplingbiases. I provide an R package ‘moultmcmc’ which implements fast inference for these models using Hamiltonian Monte Carlo samplers.
Bayesian causal inference for zero-inflated dataObservational studies determining the impact of environmental drivers of population change, are commonplace in statistical ecology. However we are frequently interested in extending purely correlative studies to determine causal mechanisms. This is particularly important when attempting to ascertain drivers of population change, as correlative mechanisms may be hiding the true important mechanisms. In contrast to other application areas, it is much more complex to use 'gold standard' randomised trials in ecology due to the nature of driving factors of change, such as climate and invasive species. In this talk, I will outline a Bayesian causal paradigm to study the impacts of environmental change using data exhibiting zero-inflation. The methodology will be applied to UK citizen science data to test for impacts of predator abundance on prey abundance.
A maximum likelihood method for encounters of unmarked animals at pointsStarting with Chandler and Royle (2013), there has been a proliferation of Bayesian inference methods for spatially explicit detection data for partially-marked or unmarked populations. These models involve latent activity centres that are modelled as arising from a spatial point process. Frequentist inference from such data has been hampered by the lack of a tractable likelihood function that marginalises out the latent activity centres. In this talk I develop a tractable likelihood, illustrate its use on simulated and real data, for both the case in which there are some marked individuals in the population and the case in which there are only observations of unmarked individuals. I also discuss some strengths and weaknesses of this kind of inference.
Using movement modelling to understand interactions with fisheries and inform spatial management of great white sharks in the southwest Indian OceanModelling tracking data from large mobile marine predators can help understand the level of risk they face from exposure to fisheries and the level of protection they get from spatial management. We analysed the movement patterns of 33 white sharks satellite-tagged in South Africa to investigate (1) the influence of size, sex and season on their movement patterns, and (2) the spatial and temporal overlap with longline and gillnet fisheries and marine protected areas (MPAs) between 2012 and 2015. We fitted a 2-state hidden Markov model to quantify ‘resident’ and ‘transient’ movement, and investigate the effect of individual and temporal covariates on the transition probabilities between states. A model with sex, total shark length and a periodic function of day of the year (season) had the most support. All tagged white sharks were more likely to be in a resident state near the coast and a transient state away from the coast, while the probability of finding a shark in the transient state increased with shark size. White sharks overlapped with longline and gillnet fisheries within 25% of South Africa’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) and spent 26% of their time exposed to these fisheries during the study period. We found that the fishery with the lowest spatial and temporal overlap (regional beach safety gear) reported the highest white shark catches, emphasising the need to combine spatiotemporal shark movement and fishing effort with reliable catch records to assess risks to shark populations more accurately. White shark exposure to beach safety gear corresponded with the catch composition of that fishery, providing support for a meaningful exposure risk estimate from the movement model. In terms of protection, white sharks spent significantly more time in MPAs than expected by chance, suggesting that MPAs can benefit large, mobile marine megafauna. This work demonstrates the benefits of combining statistical modelling with spatiotemporal information on risk exposure and protection, for improved conservation and management of endangered marine megafauna.
Laplace approximation in NIMBLENIMBLE is a flexible platform for programming and fitting hierarchical models in R. It adopts and extends the BUGS language for model declaration, and makes it possible for users to write their own algorithms in addition to using those (e.g. MCMC) provided by NIMBLE. Models and algorithms can then be compiled into C++ for efficiency. The Laplace approximation is often used to integrate out latent states from the complete data likelihood of hierarchical models. The resulting marginal likelihood is then used to estimate parameters of interest. In this talk, we will introduce the new functionality of Laplace approximation in NIMBLE, which depends on the new NIMBLE automatic differentiation system. The Laplace approximation enables one to easily and efficiently fit hierarchical models via maximum likelihood or via MCMC where latent states are completely or partially integrated out. We will use an occupancy model to illustrate the Laplace-within- MCMC functionality in NIMBLE.
Detecting behavioural responses from movement data using stochastic differential equationsLarge amounts of data are collected on animal movement, typically from animal-borne telemetry tags (e.g., GPS, accelerometer), and various statistical models have been developed to extract ecological information. One problem of general interest is to describe the time-varying behaviour of an animal based on its movement patterns, for example to understand how behaviour is affected by environmental or individual- specific conditions. We recently developed a framework to model the parameters of stochastic differential equations as nonparametric functions of covariates. In the context of animal movement, this method can be used to investigate the drivers of animal behaviour (e.g., how is speed of movement affected by covariates?). We applied this approach to investigate the effects of human disturbance, in particular ship sonars, on beaked whales. Multiple animals were tagged and exposed to sounds in controlled experiments, and we contrasted movement parameters before and after exposure events to estimate behavioural responses. The analysis was based on two data sets with different sets of analytical challenges: a coarse time series of noisy longitude-latitude locations, and a high-resolution record of depth and acceleration. We will present initial results suggesting that sound exposure can elicit multiple types of responses, including horizontal and vertical avoidance.
Quantifying the effect of bycatch mitigation efforts on the population dynamics of a long-lived seabirdBycatch in commercial fisheries is a known threat to seabird populations worldwide. Recently, the implementation of simple bycatch mitigation measures such as bird-scaring lines, line weighting, and night setting have been shown to effectively eliminate this source of seabird mortality on individual vessels. While effective, adoption rates of seabird bycatch mitigation measures in high-risk fisheries remain generally low. To date, no analyses have demonstrated whether current levels of bycatch mitigation efforts have translated into population-level benefits for seabirds. In this study, we used long-term population count and mark-recapture data in an integrated population model to estimate the population trajectory and underlying demography of the Endangered Atlantic Yellow-nosed Albatross (Thalassarche chlororhynchos) – a species commonly killed in trawl and longline fisheries in the South Atlantic Ocean. We analyzed over 30 years of data from Gough Island, an important breeding area for this species, while accounting for unobservable birds at sea. We investigated the effects of fishing effort and bycatch mitigation adoption rates for high-risk fisheries (i.e., pelagic longline, demersal longline, and demersal trawl) in core foraging areas on juvenile and adult survival. Preliminary results suggest that there is insufficient evidence to show that the expected reductions in mortality in some fisheries have translated to increases in survival at the population level. Results also suggest that the population has remained relatively stable, despite large fluctuations in fishing effort in the South Atlantic. Our study provides an important framework that has applications for assessing the population-level impacts of bycatch mitigation efforts on seabird populations worldwide. Moreover, the results of this study motivate continued effort towards increasing the adoption rate of bycatch mitigation measures in South Atlantic fisheries.
Residual diagnostic tools for multivariate normalityIn ecology, as elsewhere, multivariate normality is often assumed in analyses, but few effective graphical diagnostic tools exist to query this assumption. In this talk a new approach is developed that exploits two well-known ideas: that (under quite general conditions) full conditional distributions are diagnostic of a joint distribution; and that under multivariate normality, the full conditional for each response follows a linear regression model conditional on all other responses. Hence a simple graphical tool to diagnose multivariate normality can be constructed via standard linear regression diagnostics, regressing each response against all others. The idea will be illustrated using the classical Iris dataset, and simulations evaluating the technique will be reported. Software implementing the technique is available on R in the ecostats package.
Predicting tree growth from repeat forest surveys using longitudinal modelsRepeat surveys of forest trees in permanent plots are key for understanding forest dynamics and the productivity of forests. However, the most common growth models -- based on a single growth interval independent on those around it -- struggle to differentiate between measurement error and true growth, with biologically unlikely negative and very high growth rates a common occurrence. They also fail to incorporate the broader correlation structure from repeat measurement surveys of multiple growth intervals.To improve estimates of individual growth, we applied a longitudinal hierarchical Bayesian methodology which is able to use a sequence of repeat measures and exploit that relationship beyond a single interval to reduce overall error and account for unrealistic growth. We demonstrate the utility of this approach by fitting two hierarchical models: a constant growth rate and a size-dependent growth rate based on the core of a gamma distribution function, each with individual and species level effects. Fitting these models helps to identify unrealistic size records and provide an alternative estimated size, effectively cleaning the data. Doing so will enable better modelling of lifetime growth trajectories.We use data from a long-term forest census on Barro Colorado Island to provide robust estimates for variability in growth among individuals and species. Using a sample of 2,000 trees from seven species we are able to demonstrate corrected size estimates for individual life histories, and investigate the distribution of growth rates within a species. Models providing realistic estimates of tree growth over time will improve forestry management, theory about biodiversity, and predictions on the potential for forests to capture and store carbon worldwide.
Mechanistic hierarchical modeling reveals individual and demographic heterogeneity in migration strategy in a long-lived soaring birdMigratory strategy, including timing, routes, as well as responses to conditions en route, influences individual fitness and reproductive success. Thus, migration can carry over to affect population dynamics, especially if demographic groups display different migratory strategies and behavioral plasticity. While the relationships between migratory behavior and weather have received considerable attention in the literature, approaches for understanding these phenomena mechanistically have largely been limited to the individual level. We used a hierarchical model with a mechanistic process component at the individual, single-season level to study seasonal migration in an Alaskan breeding population of golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos). Our model allowed for joint inference about individual behavior, responses to weather, and underlying population-level processes driving individual behavior. Additionally, we used our model to disentangle the effects of year-to-year plasticity within individuals, heterogeneity across individuals, and local environmental conditions on population-level migratory patterns. We estimated parameters in our model using recursive Bayesian computing techniques to make it computationally feasible to fit the large hierarchical model to 30 individuals—each with up to 7 years of migration tracks—simultaneously. We characterized differences in migratory behavior and flexibility in responses to weather between territorial and non-territorial eagles, which is critical for understanding how changes in migratory strategies in response to changing environmental conditions may influence population dynamics for long-lived migratory species.
A Bayesian co-abundance modelling approach to measure predator-prey relationships while accounting for detection, environmental covariates, and uncertaintyUnderstanding predator-prey interactions is a fundamental goal of community ecology. The proliferation of camera trapping has enabled researchers to collect copious amounts of data on rare and cryptic predator and prey communities. However, analytical approaches for studying predator-prey interactions from observational camera trap data remains limited. Specifically accounting for each species’ detection probability, shared responses to environmental covariates, and incorporating uncertainty present analytical hurdles for researchers. Here we develop a predator-prey co-abundance model that overcomes previous barriers. First, to overcome problems inferring species interactions from co-occurrence, we utilized N- mixture models to jointly estimate both species abundances, detection probability, and effects from environmental covariates. Second, we ensured parameter convergence and sound ecological inferences from species having vastly different count histories by implementing both an informed zero-inflation Poisson error distribution in the abundance formula and a random sampling unit-sampling occasion effect to account for overdispersion in the detection probability formula. Finally, we implemented a Bayesian hierarchal modelling approach that propagates uncertainty throughout the entire modelling process. As a case study, we tested our model on interacting tiger, clouded leopard, muntjac and sambar deer populations in Southeast Asian tropical forests. We found that tiger abundance had a negative effect on muntjac deer abundance, while clouded leopard abundance had a positive effect on both muntjac and sambar deer abundance. Additionally, our models were considered a good fit based on posterior predictive checks and we examined relationships with environmental covariates that were consistent with literature. This Bayesian co-abundance modelling approach to measure predator-prey relationships overcomes many of the issues ecologists face inferring species interactions from observational data. This approach is widely applicable across species, ecosystems, and sampling approaches and sets the stage for a new era in the mechanistic understanding of food web ecology and trophic cascades.
Count Regression and Machine Learning Techniques for Zero-Inflated Overdispersed Count Data: Application to Ecological DataThe aim of this study is to investigate overdispersion problem that is rampant in ecological count data. In order to explore this problem, we consider the most commonly used count regression models; the Poisson, negative binomial, zero-inflated Poisson and zero-inflated negative binomial models. The performance of these count regression models is compared with the four proposed machine learning (ML) regression techniques; random forest, support vector machines, k-nearest neighbors and artificial neural networks.The mean absolute error (MAE) was used to compare the performance of count regression models and ML regression models. The results suggest that ML regression models performs better compared to count regression models. The performance shown by ML regression techniques is a motivation for further research in improving methods and applications in ecological studies.
Animal-borne acoustic recorders inform mark-resight models for abundance estimates in North Island Brown Kiwi (Apteryx mantelli, Bartlett)Monitoring animal populations is important to allow for appropriate conservation actions, and monitoring methods need to be as objective, efficient, and accurate as possible.Passive Acoustic Monitoring, whereby remotely deployed acoustic recorders collect data in unsupervised fashion, is relatively cheap and virtually impervious to observer's bias, whilst also producing potentially perpetual data sets.Already prominent in marine environments, this monitoring method has become popular in the terrestrial scene, however quantitative estimates are seldom possible as we lack proper scaling factors from cue numbers to animal abundance.Moreover, thanks to technological developments, miniature animal--borne loggers of many sorts, can nowadays deliver information on individual animal features, including vocal behaviour.Here we show how concurrently equipping a portion of individual animals with miniature acoustic loggers, and deploying environmental recorders can inform abundance estimates.Studying North Island Brown Kiwi (Apteryx mantelli, Bartlett 1851), we found how mark-resight models informed with individual vocal behaviour recorded through individual loggers convey more consistent and realistic abundance estimates than others.Although this is an inherently invasive method, we further detail how iterating its application can lead to fully uninvasive passive acoustic monitoring abundance. This would be possible by informing unmarked populations' estimates with individual behavioural data from marked populations while accounting for environmental covariates.Overall, combining data from miniature animal--borne acoustic recorders and environmental recorders can deliver more consistent, informed, hence realistic abundance estimates. Furthermore, this provides data for investigating individual identification which, combined with notion on the individual vocal activity would inform ever more accurate passive acoustic abundance estimates.
Improved inferences about landscape connectivity from spatial capture– recapture by integration of a movement modelUnderstanding how broad-scale patterns in animal populations emerge from individual-level processes is an enduring challenge in ecology that requires investigation at multiple scales and perspectives.Complementary to this need for diverse approaches is the recent focus on integrated modeling in statistical ecology. Population-level processes represent the core of spatial capture–recapture (SCR), with many methodological extensions that have been motivated by standing ecological theory and data integration opportunities. The extent to which these recent advances offer inferential improvements can be limited by the data requirements for quantifying individual-level processes. This is especially true for SCR models that use non-Euclidean distance to relax the restrictive assumption that individual space use is stationary and symmetrical in order to make inferences about landscape connectivity. To meet the challenges of scale and data quality, we propose integrating an explicit movement model with non-Euclidean SCR for joint estimation of a shared cost parameter between individual and population processes. Here, we define a movement kernel for step selection that uses "ecological distance" instead of Euclidean distance to quantify availability for each movement step in terms of landscape cost. We compare performance of our integrated model to that of existing SCR models using realistic animal movement simulations and data collected on black bears. We demonstrate that an integrated approach offers improvements both in terms of bias and precision in estimating the shared cost parameter over models fit to spatial encounters alone. Simulations suggest these gains were only realized when step lengths were small relative to home range size, and estimates of density were insensitive to whether or not an integrated approach was used. By combining the fine spatiotemporal scale of individual movement processes with the estimation of population density in SCR, integrated approaches such as the one we develop here have the potential to unify the fields of movement, population, and landscape ecology and improve our understanding of landscape connectivity.
Assessing Bias and Robustness of Social Network Metrics in Large HerbivoresAnimal social network analysis allows biologists to investigate the causes and consequences of animal interactions and have a better understanding of ecological and behavioural processes. It serves in testing a wide range of hypotheses about social evolution, behaviour, dynamical processes, and transmission events such as the spread of disease and social learning. Wild biological data are prone to the biases caused due to sampling protocols and the species under study and hence, sampling of animals from a wild population has been recognised as a concern. The suitability of using network metrics derived from a partial population has been investigated through various simulation studies. In this research, we use data from five different species of ungulates to determine the effects of sampling protocols on the accuracy of network summary statistics. We apply network permutation techniques, bootstrapping approach, correlation, and regression analysis to ascertain the suitability of available sample as a representative of the species behaviour. We show that the bias in the calculation of network metrics such as density, mean strength and transitivity of the network is inversely proportional to the proportion of individuals in the subsample and could be corrected for even when as low as 30% of the individuals are present in the subsample. We also present a way of obtaining confidence intervals around the network metrics estimates based on the given sample. We have created an R package to act as a readymade toolkit for ecologists to statistically analyse animal social network data and guide methodological decisions.
Drivers of compositional turnover of invasive alien plants in Kruger National ParkBiological invasions are a primary cause of biodiversity loss and ecosystem transition in many protected areas globally and across the continent. Although management targeting highly invasive species can effectively contain the spread and impact of targeted species, it is still necessary to monitor the composition and spatial distributions of broad suite of alien species. These assemblage-level monitoring efforts can help identify key drivers and pathways of invasion, devise site-based management plans, and facilitate effective control strategies. However, a large-scale monitoring programme is costly to maintain a steady data capturing rate for multiple years, making inference prone to statistical biases. We tackle this challenge using a portion of data captured by the CyberTracker system that allows field rangers to report the location of invasive alien plants and other features of interest encountered on routine patrols. The CyberTracker system consists of a user-friendly interface for mobile android devices with geographical positioning systems. It was introduced to Kruger National Park in 2003 to help achieve management goals and provide high-precision data for management and research. We used data from 2004 to 2007, which comprised 2,360,419 data points, including 27,777 presence records of 167 invasive alien plant species and 2,332,642 other features, including timer points/waypoints. We transformed these data into species lists associated with specific geographic coordinates and time. Together with selected environmental and ecological variables of the park, we used these species lists to run generalised dissimilarity modelling of zeta diversity and explore the spatial and temporal patterns of species composition and their drivers. We found that, besides the natural spread facilitated by biotic and abiotic vectors, the role of park boundaries and road systems, as well as rainfall and temperature gradients, jointly steer the spread of invasion. Consequently, climate change, ecotourism and infrastructure development/maintenance within the park will likely drive the future expansion of invasive alien plants in Kruger.
Continuous land cover change detection in Subtropical Thicket ecosystemsThe Subtropical Thicket Biome is a unique and highly biodiverse ecosystem in Southern Africa. Estimates indicate that as much as 63% of the biome is already severely degraded, with agricultural expansion the main driver of transformation. While several studies have sought to document and map the long term transformations, there is a lack of information on disturbance events that allow for timely intervention by authorities. Furthermore tools that seek to perform continuous land cover change detection are often developed for forests and thus tend to perform poorly in thicket ecosystems. This study investigates the utility of earth observation data for continuous land cover change detection in subtropical thicket ecosystems.A dataset of dated clearing events was used to train Temporal Neural Networks on time series of Sentinel-2 observations. The model obtained 0.93 accuracy, a recall score of 0.93 and a precision score of0.91 in detecting Thicket disturbances. This is an improvement in performance compared to previous studies that rely on traditional supervised post-classification change detection. The study demonstrates the potential of continuous land cover change detection in Subtropical Thicket ecosystems.
A clean, crafty, rapid approach to cluster capture-recaptureCluster capture-recapture (CCR) describes a new suite of models for capture-recapture scenarios in which animal detections can be conceptualised as a point process in time or space. Instead of organising detections into capture histories, which can be a laborious and error-prone process, the CCR approach is to model the stream of detections as a clustered point process. Although repeated detections of the same individual will tend to cluster together, there is no need to decide upon an explicit clustering in order to estimate process-level parameters such as abundance. CCR is a promising method for estimating abundance from camera traps, acoustic recorders, and mark-recapture distance sampling surveys.Up until now, CCR models have been fitted using an ad-hoc approach called the Palm likelihood method. This is not a true likelihood but simply a convenient objective function for fitting a parametric curve to the histogram of all pairwise distances between detections. The Palm method can be cumbersome to formulate and apply, and lacks the modelling flexibility that a true likelihood framework would offer.Although the exact likelihood is intractable, recent work has turned up a promising approximation to the true likelihood. A genuine likelihood approach would greatly enhance the CCR framework, eliminating the need for awkward tuning parameters and enabling much greater flexibility in modelling and model selection. I will discuss the potential for reinventing CCR as a clean, crafty, rapid method based on a close approximation to the true likelihood.
Google matrix analysis of ecological meta-community networksWe model ecological meta-communities, ie, entanglement between foodwebs and landscape patches, as a global nutrient transfer networks analyzed by methods based on the Google matrix. Nutrients can flow from species to another (species predation) or from landscape patch to another (species displacement). We use the PageRank and the CheiRank centrality measures to rank the species by their capabilities to capture and to release nutrients. These rankings can be obtained for each landscape patch or globally for the whole landscape. The PageRank-CheiRank balance will be computed allowing a cross-analysis with the species trophic levels. Our approach provides a new method for the analysis of species interactions embedded in meta-communities. We analyze also the sensitivity of centrality measures, PageRank and CheiRank, to ecological link weight variation induced by ontogenic changes, species diet modifications, or landscape reshaping.
Adaptive sampling for community science: can both models and people benefit?Community or citizen science represents a major source of biodiversity information and many researchers are currently working with communities to collect data in the most informative locations. Increasingly, this effort is model-based rather than empirical i.e. models of existing information are used to inform the best new locations for participants to visit through an adaptive sampling design. If the aim is to produce spatial estimates of species occurrence then, theoretically, selecting new locations based on prediction uncertainty of an initial model should lead to reductions in average predictive variance in an updated model compared to random sampling. However, applying adaptive sampling in the context of citizen science raises complications which may alter the potential benefit from adaptive designs. For example, initial data may be a biased sample of geographic or environmental space, and not all space may be accessible to the community. The efficacy of adaptive sampling may also be reduced as recorders can decide whether or not to follow recommendations from an adaptive design. Finally, we consider the likelihood of a tradeoff between the objectives of model improvement versus the need to maintain recorder engagement.We explore the potential benefits of adaptive sampling in the context of citizen science in a simulation study parameterised to reflect current recording patterns of British butterflies. We consider six potential adaptive designs ranging from empirical (record where no records currently exist) to model-based (record where uncertainty is highest). Some of the designs also consider incentives to recording (record where rare species are most likely to be seen). We find that adaptive sampling in the realistic context of biased initial data and variable uptake is rarely a clear improvement over existing sampling, and tradeoffs may occur which could risk both the accuracy of model outputs and future engagement of recorders. These findings are important when considering how to optimise recording effort in the future.
Capture-recapture models with heterogeneous temporary emigrationThere exist several capture-recapture (CR) models for estimating population size and, in open populations, arrival and departure times of individuals. Existing models either assume that emigration is permanent and each individual performs a single visit to the surveyed site, or rely on a specialised sampling scheme, which assumes population closure for parts of the sampling period, referred to as Pollock's robust design.However, in practice, emigration is often temporary, and methods relying on Pollock's robust design cannot be employed.We propose a novel approach for modelling CR data on open populations that exhibit temporary emigration, whilst also accounting for individual heterogeneity to allow for differences in visit patterns and capture probabilities between individuals. Our modelling approach combines changepoint processes -- fitted using an adaptive approach -- for inferring individual visits, with Bayesian mixture modelling -- fitted using a nonparametric approach -- for identifying clusters of individuals with similar visit patterns or capture probabilities. The proposed method is extremely flexible as it can be applied to any CR data set and is not reliant upon specialised sampling schemes.We fit the new model to motivating data on salmon anglers collected annually at the Gaula river in Norway. Our results when analysing data from the 2017, 2018 and 2019 seasons reveal two clusters of anglers -- consistent across years -- with substantially different visit patterns. Most anglers are allocated to the “occasional visitors” cluster, making infrequent and shorter visits with mean total length of stay at the river of around four days, whereas there also exists a small cluster of ``super visitors'', with regular and longer visits as well as higher fishing ability, with mean total length of stay between 15 and 20 days in a season.Our estimate of the probability of catching salmon whilst at the river is more than three times higher than that obtained when using a model that does not account for temporary emigration, giving us a better understanding of the impact of fishing at the river. Finally, we discuss the effect of the covid-19 pandemic on the angling population by modelling data from the 2020 season.
Fitting dynamic models for interacting species using both population count and interaction rate dataMost mechanistic predator-prey and competition modelling has attempted either parameterization from process rate data or inverse modelling (identifying parameters solely from time series of population counts). Here, we take a median road: we aim at identifying the potential benefits of combining datasets, when both population growth and interactions processes are viewed as stochastic. We start by fitting a discrete-time, stochastic predator-prey model of the Leslie type to time series of densities and attack rate data, simulated from the model. We examine what the attack rate data brings to the quality of the estimates, and whether estimation would be possible (for various time series length) solely with time series of counts. Both Bayesian and frequentist estimation are performed, and the Fisher Information Matrix suggests that models with and without attack rate data are both identifiable. However, our results show that if the attractor is a fixed point in the absence of stochasticity, identifying parameters in practice requires in fact attack rate data as a complement to the time series of population densities, due to the relatively flat likelihood in this case. Only noisy limit cycle attractors can be identified directly from ecological count data (as in inverse modelling), although we show that even in this case, adding attack rate data can make the estimates much more precise. If time allows, we will generalize these results to two-species competition models. In general, our framework highlights the benefits of adding interaction rate data - even in small amounts - to models that predict the population dynamics of interacting species.
On the need of big data and capacity building for conservation: the Snapshot Safari South Africa experienceBiodiversity is declining rapidly in many regions worldwide. However, to understand ecosystems and species patterns, systematic monitoring and new data collection approaches are needed. Therefore, scientists are developing tools to assess these patterns in the most accurate and timely way possible to inform conservation planning. In this sense, new technologies such as landscape or climatic sensors are crucial tools to collect information continuously to anticipate particular events. For species diversity, camera traps have become the most popular way for collecting mammals data and there are large projects aiming at monitoring this group using this technique. Cameras are so effective that they generate not thousands but millions of photos, and the management of these large data sets presents many challenges. Here, we highlight the experience of the Snapshot Safari project, a large camera trap network aiming at monitoring mammal diversity in southern Africa, and reflect on the progress and limitations to manage and analyze camera trap data for conservation purposes. Snapshot Safari South Africa uses cutting-edge technology to detect species and citizen science to classify pictures through an online platform called Zooniverse.However, to improve data processing we have also partnered with WildEye, whose TrapTagger platform uses machine-vision technologies to increase both the speed and accuracy of the data annotation process. To facilitate data sharing we are building open-source codes and repositories so researchers can access and explore our data. However, we are still in need of standardized data processing tools that help us to provide not only raw data but also basic results that can help managers to inform conservation practice. In this sense, the need to create capacity building and to work closely with other fields such as engineering and statistics has never been so important in order to inform conservation policies. We believe Snapshot Safari has the potential to expand our knowledge of southern African mammals and terrestrial birds species and add up to current worldwide monitoring programs that will help to understand planetary trends and inform management decisions.
Robust Bayesian Design for Monitoring Submerged Shoals off the coast of Western AustraliaRecently, there has been a call for more “information on the prevalence and the ecological and economic importance of deep coral-reef communities”. This was motivated by the potentially vital role these deeper reefs play in sustaining shallower reefs through, for example, a source of larval replenishment is less impacted by anthropogenic. The typical remote location and depth of these reefs mean they are often sheltered from many human and natural disturbances. While this may offer advantages around sustainability and resilience, they provide significant challenges for effective monitoring. Thus, we aim to develop a resource-efficient and effective monitoring program for deep coral-reef communities, and apply this to monitor submerged shoals off the Western coast of Australia.To develop a monitoring program for submerged shoals, we consider coral cover as an indicator for the health of the coral community, and model historical data within a Bayesian inference framework. This is due to the rigorous uncertainty handling and the natural way prior information is included into the modelling process. Bayesian designs are then found within this framework typically by maximising the expected information to be obtained from a design based on an assumed statistical model. However, correctly specifying this model for coral cover within submerged shoals is difficult due to the lack of information about these reefs and the difficulty in appropriately describing complex ecological processes. To address this, we present an approach to find Bayesian designs robust to the specified model. This is achieved through formulating a base model from the historical data within the Generalised Additive Modelling structure, which allows the model to be flexible and thus describe a wide range of relationships between the response and the predictors. Through leveraging this flexibility in design, we can find designs that will be informative across a large class of models. This is demonstrated by finding transects to sample a submerged shoal. The performance of this design is then assessed, including the performance under a variety of alternative base models. As will be shown, our designs remain effective in capturing information on coral health, even in cases where the base model is misspecified.
An ecological forecasting manifesto for a Global Biodiversity HotspotManaging and mitigating threats to biodiversity requires regularly-updated, spatially-explicit information. Better still would be to have explicit, regularly updated forecasts of anticipated change in ecological properties on timescales relevant for management and policy decisions. The hyperdiverse Cape Floristic Region (CFR) is both a Global Biodiversity Hotspot and a Global Extinction Hotspot, threatened by habitat loss and fragmentation, altered fire regimes, invasive species, and climate change, among others. I’ll present a set of ongoing ecological forecasting projects and feasible forecasting opportunities that relate directly to existing management and policy needs within the CFR. I’ll focus on the potential for learning from these forecasts, but also the potential to compare, couple and build on these forecasts, to gain a much deeper understanding of the anomalous biodiversity, ecology and conservation of this globally important region.
Developing a Bayesian state-space model for whale health and vital rates to quantify the combined effects of multiple stressorsAssessing and predicting the combined effects of multiple stressors on wildlife populations is a pressing management and conservation problem. However, for long-lived, wide-ranging species, it is not possible to measure the population-level consequences of multiple combinations of stressors directly. Mechanistic models of the functional cascades between stressor exposure and individual vital rates (survival and reproduction), mediated by changes in health, can be used instead to make predictions of these effects.Here, we use a long-term dataset of visually assessed health variables and life history from North Atlantic right whales (NARW) to develop one such approach. We cannot design experiments to quantify the effects of stressors on critically endangered species like NARW, but modelling can help management prioritize interventions to ensure population viability. Specifically, we reformulate a Bayesian state-space model for individual health and survival. A latent health state determines survival probability and is observed via four ordinal logistic regressions, generating the categorical health data: body condition, skin condition, cyamid load and rake marks. We extend the model to evaluate the effects of stressors that might affect survival directly (e.g., ship strikes and entanglements), or indirectly via health (e.g., sub-lethal entanglement).Moreover, we include a spatial structure, informed by the location of individuals’ sightings, to account for the heterogeneous distribution of stressors across the species’ range. In future, we plan to adjust theanalytical approach so that it can be used to assess stressor effects on reproduction, in addition to survival. Ensuring the efficient convergence and mixing of the model requires extensive exploration of the trade-offs between complexity and data availability. Therefore, this effort offers a useful testbed as we strive to develop effective statistical methods to assess the combined effects of multiple stressors on individuals and populations.
Beyond bespoke: standardizing integrated population models for comparative and range-wide studiesIntegrated population models (IPMs) have become very popular in recent years due to key advantages such as making efficient use of limited data and taking full account of various sources of uncertainty. Another often-highlighted strength is the fact that flexible Bayesian implementations allow tailoring each IPM specifically to the population under study, as well as the types and structure of available data sources. While having a “bespoke” model can undoubtedly provide unique insights into the dynamics of a single population of a single species in a single location, heavily tailored models are not very well suited for larger-scale comparative and/or range-wide studies. Yet such studies, encompassing multiple populations, are what is needed to address threats to biodiversity at national and global scales.During the same time as IPMs have gained popularity, standards for formatting, documenting, and publishing ecological data have come a long way. More and more data are being made available in standardized formats adhering to the FAIR principles, and this opens new possibilities for data integration with the aim of studying changes in biodiversity at much larger spatial scales. Importantly, this no longer applies only to species distribution models for occurrence data, but for a broader range of models for a large variety of data types, including data on population abundance and demographic rates.Standardization of population- and demographic data allows for standardization of IPMs and IPM workflows. We illustrate this with a generalized IPM designed to be fit to commonly collected data on hole- nesting birds which has been standardized as part of the SPI-Birds Network and Database initiative. Through standardized analysis of data from multiple populations we obtain insights into the overarching drivers of the widespread population declines of migratory passerines and identify both similarities and differences the responses of different breeding populations across a latitudinal gradient.We thus showcase how IPMs can be generalized to provide a multi-population perspective of demographic drivers across large spatial scales and highlight the importance of facilitating their use by linking them to relevant databases and by providing high-quality documentation not only for model code, but entire analysis workflows.
Using new wavelet tools to disentangle the role of local and global climatic forcing on the dengue epidemicsIn this study we used wavelet decomposition to reanalyze the influence of local and global climatic forcing on the spatial and temporal dynamics of dengue, in the 76 provinces of Thailand. New wavelet tools – partial wavelet coherency, wavelet mean field and wavelet clustering – allow us to ascertain the particular influence of each climatic forcing. These new analyses demonstrate, for example, that local climatic variables are responsible for the seasonal mode, in all the provinces, and that global climatic oscillations are accountable for the low frequency components of dengue epidemics.
Accounting for varying spatial scales in the production of UK butterfly abundance estimatesOver the past four decades, three-quarters of UK butterfly species have declined in abundance, distribution or both. Butterflies respond quickly to habitat and climatic change, hence their population status is a valuable biodiversity indicator. Analysis of long-term butterfly monitoring datasets has provided some ofthe world’s best evidence of the biological impacts of climate change, including major phenological and distribution shifts, evolutionary responses and the impacts of extreme events.Long-term citizen-science count data allows for the estimation of abundance estimates in the UK. However, currently population trends are assessed only at the national scale, and it has been shown that there is spatial variation in flight periods within a species across the UK. We show how the current framework to produce abundance estimates, the generalised abundance index (GAI), developed by Dennis et al. 2016 (Biometrics), can be adapted to account for spatial variation in flight periods. Furthermore, we demonstrate the efficacy of varying spatial scales in producing robust estimates of abundance. The use of this model should allow for more strategic planning and land management across regions of the UK, and, at a smaller scale, for site managers at protected sites across the UK. We hope that this work will aid conservation of UK butterflies as well as then being used in a wider context for similar citizen-science datasets across Europe, to understand and mitigate butterfly declines.
Spatio-temporal point processes as meta-models for population dynamics in heterogeneous landscapesLandscape heterogeneity affects population dynamics, which determine species persistence, diversity and interactions. These relationships can be accurately represented by advanced spatially-explicit models (SEMs) allowing for high levels of detail and precision. However, such approaches are characterised by high computational complexity, high amount of data and memory requirements, and spatio-temporal outputs may be difficult to analyse. A possibility to deal with this complexity is to aggregate outputs over time or space, but then interesting information may be masked and lost, such as local spatio-temporal relationships or patterns. An alternative solution is given by meta-models and meta-analysis, where simplified mathematical relationships are used to structure and summarise the complex transformations from inputs to outputs. Here, we propose an original approach to analyse SEM outputs. By developing a meta-modelling approach based on spatio-temporal point processes (STPPs), we characterise spatio-temporal population dynamics and landscape heterogeneity relationships in agricultural contexts. A landscape generator and a spatially-explicit population model simulate hierarchically the pest-predator dynamics of codling moth and ground beetles in apple orchards over heterogeneous agricultural landscapes. Spatio-temporally explicit outputs are simplified to marked point patterns of key events, such as local proliferation or introduction events. Then, we construct and estimate regression equations for multi-type STPPs composed of event occurrence intensity and magnitudes. Results provide local insights into spatio-temporal dynamics of pest- predator systems. We are able to differentiate the contributions of different driver categories ( i.e., spatio- temporal, spatial, population dynamics). We highlight changes in the effects on occurrence intensity and magnitude when considering drivers at global or local scale. This approach leads to novel findings in agroecology where, for example, we show that the organisation of cultivated patches and semi-natural elements play different roles for pest regulation depending on the scale considered. It aids to formulate guidelines for biological control strategies at global and local scale.
Design and analysis of large-scale spatial capture-recapture surveysSpatial capture-recapture (SCR) surveys are widely used to estimate animal density and to understand why animals distribute themselves as they do. Increasingly SCR is used to sample large areas, with the aim of assessing density across a much bigger region than can be practically surveyed with one detector array. The standard way to do this is with multiple arrays ("clustered" detectors) and analysing the resulting capture histories using "multisession" analyses in which model parameters may be shared across the spatial sessions. This approach is ideal but assumes a high degree of coordination and data sharing at the design and analysis stage that may not always be present, for example if surveys are independently conducted by multiple teams and full sharing of capture histories is not feasible. In this talk I describe various cases that can arise, and for each provide a way to analyse the resulting data using SCR. A project assessing global snow leopard abundance across a range of some two million square kilometers is used as an example.
The role of detectability on bird population trend estimates in an open farmland landscapeMonitoring programs are key to determine bird population trends and to assess environmental policies, and therefore are central to conservation biology. The European approach commonly used to estimate bird population trends (TRends and Indices for Monitoring data, hereafter TRIM) has proved useful to fulfil this task, yet it fails to account for imperfect detection and assumes constant detectability across years. We tested the role of detectability for population trend estimation in an open Mediterranean farmland context, which is a dynamic landscape likely to undergo yearly changes in detectability, by using data of 30 bird species over a nine-year study period. We evaluated species-specific population trends under the TRIM approach and hierarchical distance sampling models (hereafter HDS) that estimate true abundance by accounting for imperfect detection. When comparing both methods, 13 species presented differences in population trend estimates between TRIM and HDS models. Moreover, detectability was not constant across the bird community: observer and year affected detection, and these effects varied among species. Our study highlights the importance of accounting for imperfect detection in bird monitoring programs to ensure reliable trend estimates, providing a first insight for an open farmland bird community. Aside from trend estimates, our HDS model may prove useful as a tool to obtain site-specific abundance estimates (for instance, within Special Protection Areas) and trend probabilities of bird populations.
South Africa’s national environmental screening tool: an online tool to ensure responsible land use decision-making and the protection of species of conservation concernEnvironmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) provide a framework for assessing the potential impacts of development on biodiversity, and other environmental sensitivities to ensure responsible decision-making. While South Africa has progressive legislation governing development, flaws and loopholes in the regulations have, on occasion, led to the irreversible loss of critical habitats. Recent legislative changes have been made to address these shortcomings, one of them being the introduction of a national Environmental Screening Tool. The screening tool is an online Geographic Information System tool that screens for environmental sensitivity at the site of a proposed development. Submission of a report generated by the screening tool is now mandatory when applying for environmental authorisation for any infrastructure development.A fundamental step in the EIA process relates to understanding and identifying the community of threatened species that development may impact. Quantifying biodiversity at a development site is a difficult undertaking given our imperfect ability to fully detect all species present through ecological surveys. In the absence of complete species inventories, it is essential to have complementary methods to provide insight into patterns of local biodiversity. Species distribution models (SDMs) provide a robust and objective model-based method to complement field surveys.The Endangered Wildlife Trust, in collaboration with the South African National Biodiversity Institute and BirdLife South Africa, has over the last two years developed a database comprising a mix of SDMs and range maps for threatened and endemic terrestrial animals in South Africa for over 400 species from six taxa, including: amphibians, birds, butterflies, mammals, reptiles, and invertebrates. These data have been integrated into the screening tool and have resulted in an unprecedented collation of threatened species data used for the explicit purpose of supporting responsible land use decision-making.In this talk I outline the structure and underlying species data of the tool itself, the methodologies used to develop the SDMs, the results from the analyses, how the tool is used in the EIA process, and how model outputs developed for the tool have resulted in several other promising conservation research avenues.
A framework for predicting species abundances from distributional patterns of presences and absences: simulation and empirical testsUnderstanding how species abundances vary across populations and species is important for theoretical, empirical, and applied contexts. Species Abundance Models (SAMs) are often used to model species abundances in space (e.g., across sites, lakes) as a function of environmental variables. While environmental variables are easily accessible, they do not always provide all the required sources of variation to predict abundances. Species interactions and missing environmental predictors are important factors that reduce SAMs predictive performances. Moreover, precise estimates of species abundances to calibrate SAMs are usually available for a much smaller fractions of sites for which the model is needed for prediction. Taken these challenges together, SAMs occasionally use presence-absence data across multiple species, which are easier to gather, to infer species interactions and missing environmental predictors. Because these models are known to have mixed performances, we investigate potential factors that may lead to lower SAMs predictive abilities. We focus on the generalised linear latent variable models (GLLVM) to model community composition that are then included in SAMs. We use simulations and a large empirical fish dataset for which there is accurate abundance estimates for 700 lakes and 84 species in Canada to assess the performance of this latent-based SAM approach. Our simulations consist of generating species abundances across a very large number of sites (universe); and then sample a much smaller number of sites, estimate our latent- based SAMs, and predict the known abundance for the remaining sites in the universe. We use different scenarios to generate random and systematic perturbations to emulate errors in abundance estimates used to fit the proposed latent-based SAM. By identifying the conditions in which model predictability is affected, we can determine strategies to minimize these errors. The empirical lake-fish abundances are used to evaluate when and how different strategies designed to reduce random and systematic errors may improve the performance of SAMs.
Modelling seabird central place foraging under anthropogenic environmental changeGiven the extensive planned expansion of offshore renewable energy sites, it is important to anticipate the effects that this may have on the surrounding marine environment. Important aspects include both direct and indirect effects on seabird demographics, and hence abundance. Advances in GPS tagging technology have allowed increased tracking of a wider range of seabird species, creating an opportunity for more biologically realistic modelling to support impact assessment.My PhD project focuses on developing models of the movement paths of central-place foraging seabirds during the breeding season. We assume that the bird takes a directed trip away from its nest, and then alternates between foraging and resting out at sea, before returning to its nest. These assumptions are formulated as a set of biologically well-defined behavioural states that the model switches between, with movement within each state following a novel continuous-time step-and-turn model. We use a modelling framework in which both the switching rates between behavioural states and the characteristics of the steps and turns can be dependent on time and on spatial covariates.Current work involves the simulation of tracks, and then assessing their biological plausibility and tailoring them to specific seabird species. We are then in the process of developing statistical methods to fit them to telemetry data. The simulations themselves can also be built into existing models of environmental impact, to enhance their defensibility. The ultimate objective of the project is to use these models and statistical methods to help better understand how a seabird’s behaviour and movement patterns are likely to be affected by changes in the environment, including limitations on accessibility due to offshore developments such as wind turbines and changes in prey availability due to climate change.
A dynamic occupancy model for interacting species with two spatial scalesOccupancy models have been extended to account for either multiple spatial scales or species interactions in a dynamic setting. However, including nested spatial scales might be especially relevant to models of interacting species (e.g predator-prey) as they often operate at different spatial scales. Here we bridge these two model frameworks by developing a dynamic multi-scale two-species occupancy model. The model estimates species specific initial occupancy, colonization and extinction probabilities on two nested spatial scales conditional to the other species' presence. We conduct a simulation study that demonstrates the model’s ability to estimate parameters without marked bias under low, medium and high average occupancy probabilities, as well as low, medium and high detection probabilities. We further evaluate the model's ability to deal with sparse field data by applying it to a multi-scale camera trapping dataset on a mustelid-rodent predator-prey system. We find that this model framework creates opportunities to explicitly account for the spatial structure found in many spatially nested study designs, and to study interacting species that have contrasted movement ranges with camera traps.
Improved double observer survey method to estimate a mountain ungulate population in Gran Paradiso National Park (Italian Alps)The double observer (DO) is a common census technique to estimate the abundance of wild animal populations while accounting for the issue of imperfect detection, but it can be costly to perform in large or mountainous areas. Here we used computer simulations to test the reliability of a new proposed census method based on total block counts adjusted with only a few DO surveys in a small proportion of the total area to estimate detection probability without the need for individually tagged animals. We simulated populations including a group size effect on detectability and allowing for possible miscounts during the observations. We also compared the effectiveness of several frequentist and Bayesian approaches to assess detection probability with DO data.Our method was developed in particular for the Alpine ibex (Capra ibex) in Gran Paradiso National Park (GPNP) in the Italian Alps, but it can be widely applied to estimate abundance in other species. Alpine ibex in GPNP have been regularly monitored by park rangers with yearly counts following the same protocol since 1956, but an evaluation of the uncertainty around such counts is lacking. Besides, current ibex census methods do not consider imperfect detection leading to an underestimation of abundance and lower precision in population dynamics studies.Our method proved to be solid and was able to estimate 90-102% of the actual population from just a few subareas (around 10-15% of the total area), with a similar performance as a complete DO survey in the entire area, while block counts largely underestimated the population. We also found different performances of the various approaches to estimate the detection probability, with larger divergence at low detectabilities. Our results suggest that adjusting total block counts with detectability estimated with DO surveys in a subset of the area is a viable and cost effective census strategy potentially useful for estimating abundance in various wild species traditionally counted with total block counts.
Bayesian Inference for Animal Movement: Rigorously Approximating Continuous-Time ModelsBy modelling the movement of animals, we may glean information on how inter-species, intra-species, and environmental interaction affects their behaviour. This aids greatly with assessing the ecological impact of invasive species and anthropological environmental change. It is common for statistical ecologists to model this movement as a discrete-time process, typically a Markov chain with a state-space defined by location and by a finite number of behavioural states. However, a discrete-time approach may be problematic when faced with datasets having irregular observations or analyses on contrasting time scales.Modelling animal movement in continuous time accounts for these problems. However, as of yet, biologists have been slow to adopt this approach. This is in part due to the nature of fitting exact continuous-time models to large datasets, which is extremely computationally demanding and therefore infeasibly slow. In this research, we explore and develop methods of formulating models in continuous time and approximating them rigorously such that fitting them becomes competitive with models in discrete time.One existing approach involves limiting the number of behavioural switches that may occur between any two observations; we will discuss the strengths and weaknesses of that work, and describe some current work aimed at both improving the approximation and speeding up computation.By improving the efficiency of fitting continuous-time models of movement, we aim to make them more accessible to biologists and therefore better understood and more widely used in the scientific community. This may result in a greater number of more appropriate movement models which may have a wider impact on conservation efforts and the wider field of statistical movement ecology.
Using movement modelling to Integrate transect and telemetry dataMichelot, Blackwell and Matthiopoulos (2019; Ecology, 100(1), e02452) describe a statistical modelling framework which incorporates both long-term resource selection and short-term step selection in a coherent and consistent way, with a single set of selection parameters. Our approach is based on exploiting a mathematical analogy between the way that an animal moves around its environment following some utilisation distribution, and the way that certain rejection-free Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms explore a parameter space, defined in terms of a posterior probability distribution. This gives a way of constructing a wide range of movement processes, in discrete or continuous time, that are consistent with any given utilisation distribution. I will outline some extensions to the kinds of models with these properties.Because this framework allows us to write down likelihoods for both telemetry, which reflects local step selection, and survey data, which reflects a long-term utilisation distribution, it has the additional benefit that it allows the integration of these different types of data in a natural way, which can be surprisingly straightforward to implement. One application of this form of data integration is to investigate the merits of different possible experimental designs using telemetry, surveys or both. I will describe some results from simulation experiments that explore the trade-offs and synergies between different kinds of data collection and the relationship between the accuracy of estimation of the selection parameters and some measures of effort and spatial coverage.
Bayesian joint species distribution modelling using StanJoint species distribution modelling (jSDM) has shown increasing popularity with ecologists over the past few years as it allows for the modelling of species responses to environmental factors simultaneously with interspecies correlations. Within this presentation we will introduce a new R package for Bayesian jSDM that provides an interface for fitting these models within the Stan language. Currently supported jSDM types include multivariate generalised linear mixed models (i.e. where the entire species covariance matrix is fitted) and generalised linear latent variable models (i.e. where the species covariance matrix is approximated by a small number of latent variables). Using the Stan probabilistic programming language allows us to exploit the Stan implementation of Hamiltonian Monte Carlo for more efficient and robust exploration of the model parameter space. This presentation will demonstrate how to use this package to simulate data according to these jSDMs, fit models and return useful diagnostics and summaries. Package performance in recovering parameters from simulated data will be presented for a range of species and site numbers, along with varying average rarity of species, in order to identify some of the strengths and limitations of these models. We hope that this package will provide a valuable tool for ecologists wishing to fit joint species distribution models in a Bayesian context.
Multi-scale animal movement modelling using state-switching varying- coefficient stochastic differential equationsStochastic differential equations (SDEs) are popular tools for uncovering mechanistic relationships underlying time series data. By modelling the parameters of the process of interest as potentially smooth functions of a given set of covariates, varying-coefficient SDEs provide an extension of basic SDEs that allows us to capture more detailed, non-stationary features of the data-generating process. However, in practice, these parameters often vary at multiple time scales, which will be illustrated using dive data of Baird's beaked whales: while changes in pitch, roll, and heading exhibited within some dives can be described by some varying-coefficient SDE, other dives can be better characterised by other varying-coefficient SDEs; a pattern that is not readily accommodated for by the existing approach. To account for such state-switching patterns between dives while simultaneously allowing to make inference on the underlying behavioural processes that occur within dives, we propose a Markov chain operating at the between-dives scale that selects among a finite set of varying-coefficient SDEs to model the behaviour at the within-dive scale. The resulting class of state-switching varying-coefficient SDEs thus allows us to simultaneously model time series data at multiple time scales in a joint modelling framework.
Unique animal photo-identification with siamese neural networksWild animal conservation measures are taken on the basis of animal population parameters such as abundance, survival and birth rate, produced through individual animal identification (ID). Traditional methods include tagging, marking, and manual identification of photos, but these methods can be time- consuming and in some cases invasive. However, non-invasive approaches can exploit photographs of species with unique characteristics to carry out individual identification. This research work builds a photo- identification model that can reliably match photographs of the same individual based on unique characteristics. The model is a combination of a segmentation model and a photo-matching classifier. The segmentation model is a convolutional neural network that takes an image with one or multiple individual animals as input and produces the region of each animal conveying individual-specific characteristics.The photo-matching model is a siamese neural network that takes two images produced by the segmentation model and utilizes individual-specific and latent characteristics to predict the probability that a pair of images originates from the same individual (a match). Unique individuals are then generated from the obtained matches. The developed model focuses on humpback whale, bottlenose dolphin, and harbour seal datasets as case studies.
Cannot see the wood for the trees: Survivorship bias in CMR models`Survivorship bias' is a common error where conclusions are made based upon those who have survived while ignoring those that did not. This issue has been studied in the fields of economy, construction, forestry, health, etc. (Czeisler et al., 2021; Cooke et al., 2003). However, the exploration of this issue in the context of capture-mark-recapture (CMR) models has been very limited. In particular, this bias can be immediately observed within CMR models in the presence of individual (random) effects which subsequently induces a form of age dependence (or time-in-study dependence) on the survival probabilities, i.e. the weaker individuals are more likely to die earlier, while stronger ones are commonly alive later in the study.In this study we investigate the issues that arises within individual heterogeneity models, particularly in terms of the interpretation of the model parameters. To illustrate this, we explore several CMR models, from the simplest case with only individual random effects to models that include additional age and/or time dependencies. We highlight the necessity in the careful interpretation of the model parameters when individual random effects are included in the context of CMR models.
Life-history traits variation of the North-East common dolphin population evidenced through cross-sectional monitoringThe usual methodology for obtaining demographic information on populations is the long-term monitoring of marked individuals. The use of this approach makes it possible to highlight the influence of factors, such as environment and additional mortality, at the individual and population levels on the demographic parameters. However, some animal species cannot be monitored individually on a long-term basis. To obtain demographic information on the populations associated with these species, it is necessary to rely on another type of monitoring, which is cross-sectional monitoring. This type of monitoring involves both the collection of age-at-death data from carcasses and important underlying assumptions. These data can be collected on toothed marine mammal species that are accessible through strandings. The common dolphin is a delphinid species associated with high conservation stakes at the European level. Demographic data related to the North-East Atlantic population are almost non-existent due to the impossibility of tracking individuals (long term monitoring). Age-at-death and reproductive-status-at-death data were collected on common dolphins stranded on the French seashore between 1997 and 2019. The data collection protocol was based on stratified random sampling that allowed to represent the structure of strandings data on size, year of death, cause of death and sex ratio in order to minimize the representability bias. Then we used a newly modelling approach based on regression that allows to estimate survival and reproductive parameters from collected data considering covariates, cohort effects and additional mortality. Based on the estimates, a demographic projection was made using a Leslie matrix model. This work is the first to show a change in the life history traits of the common dolphin, in terms of survival and reproduction, over time using cross-sectional monitoring. It appears that the population seems to survive less well and mature earlier. It is also the first work on this species to show the effect of an additional source of mortality on age- specific survival. This work constitutes a valuable contribution from an applied point of view, by feeding into management policies, and also from a fundamental point of view by raising the question of the use of cross- sectional monitoring.
Integrating spatiotemporal epidemiological models with time-to-event age-period survival modelsModels of latent disease transmission processes are crucial for understanding infectious disease dynamics, to develop mitigation strategies, and to understand their impact on populations. Cross-sectional spatially referenced age-specific prevalence data can be used to estimate the force of infection, a prime example of a latent dynamic epidemiological rate that characterizes disease transmission. These data can be modeled using a time-to-event framework, estimating the force of infection on a continuous time scale. However, model estimates are sensitive to disease-associated mortality, the increase in mortality that occurs when animals are infected with a disease regardless of the source of mortality. Thus, survival is another crucial demographic process needed to understand the impact that diseases may have on populations and can also be modeled in a continuous time-to event framework when mortality data are collected. However, methods are lacking for seamlessly connecting these processes within a single modeling framework. To fill this gap, we developed an integrated hierarchical Bayesian model to jointly model cross-sectional prevalence data and known-fate mortality data, connecting continuous time disease and mortality hazard rates to correct force of infection estimates for disease associated mortality. We have developed these models to further understanding of the population impacts of chronic wasting disease, a neuro-degenerative prion disease that effects cervids. We used models to obtain age-period mortality hazard rates for white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) in south-central Wisconsin, USA using data obtained from GPS collared adult and telemetry collared juveniles from 2017-2021. We estimated the force of infection for this population, corrected for disease associated mortality, from spatially referenced cross-sectional hunter harvest surveillance data from 2002-2021. Our modeling approach provides a novel method for integrating these continuous time processes to further understanding of disease and population dynamics.
Comparison of existing and spatio-temporal methods to apportion catch limits for subregional management of groundfish in the Gulf of AlaskaManagement of fisheries relies on model predictions of the estimated biomass of stocks in order to determine how many fish can be safely harvested in a given year without negatively impacting the population. Consequently, continually seeking the most accurate and precise models possible for this use is always a goal of fisheries’ managers. Towards that end, this study compares the current modeling approach to predict stock biomass, a random walk model, with a delta-GLMM spatiotemporal model implemented using the VAST package, for groundfish stocks in the Gulf of Alaska (GOA) that are managed using subregional catch allocation. These subregions in the GOA include 3 areas: western, central and eastern GOA. This analysis uses bottom trawl survey data collected by NOAA for two species of groundfish, Pacific Ocean Perch (Sebastes alutus) and Northern Rockfish (Sebastes polyspinis). The performance of the random walk and delta-GLMM models will be evaluated by using jackknife resampling and several evaluationmetrics, including a metric to quantify the amount of variation associated with each model’s predicted biomass as well as a metric to evaluate how accurate the model predictions are in comparison to the survey data for each subregion.
A Long-Term Age-Specific Survival Analysis of Reintroduced Tiger (Panthera tigris tigris) in Panna Tiger Reserve, Central IndiaTiger populations have declined worldwide due to poaching, prey depletion, habitat loss and other anthropogenic interferences. Panna Tiger Reserve (PTR) is the north-easternmost typically isolated source population in Central Indian landscape. Such populations are likely to have undesirable demographic parameters and most vulnerable to extinction due to demographic or environmental stochasticity.However, PTR lost its native population due to high degree of poaching activities. We have studied the population dynamics of tigers in PTR since the reintroduction took place in 2009. Capture-recapture (CR) models have become a popular tool in population ecology for estimating demographic parameters; using combination of techniques and tools including radio-telemetry, camera trap and direct observations, we used data of 82 individuals from 2009 to 2021 in maximum likelihood-based Cormack-Jolly-Seber (CJS) to investigate the survival rate of the overall population. Mortality trajectory analysis provides the opportunity to understand age-specific impact in species’ life history. We used Bayesian survival trajectory analysis (BaSTA) to analyze age-specific CR based survival analysis. We obtained the grid-based camera trap data to understand the change in tiger density pattern in closed population framework under spatially explicit capture-recapture (SECR) from 2015-2020. The survival rate of the population was 86% (SE 0.04); it was higher for females (89%, SE 0.24) than the males (83%, SE0.03). Moreover, time had no significant impact on the change of survival rate of the population. We observed non-constant mortality trajectories for both the sexes and U-shaped hazard curve indicated higher risk of death in younger and older individuals. The survival probability of the male tigers from 0-4 years of age varied from 55%-100%, while for females 75%- 100%; that reduced to 20%-55% for males and 35%-75% for females for the age class of 4-10 years. At the age of 16; trajectory decreased up to 5% for males and 20% for females. Density of the tigers have raised from 3.18±0.7 to 6.05±0.9/100Km2 from 2015-2020. Low cubs’ mortality and high survival rate helped to recover the reintroduced population. Prioritization of conservation efforts for such source population can be proposed as a strategy for recovering the tiger population.
Quantifying and propagating uncertainty when assessing impacts of proposed offshore renewables developments on seabirdsOffshore renewable energy production is growing rapidly, and is a central element in meeting ambitious global and national targets to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. However, offshore renewable developments themselves have the potential to impact biodiversity when many species, including seabirds, are already declining because of climate change and other drivers. Impacts may occur either through direct mortality (e.g. collision) or through indirect mortality (e.g. displacement or barrier effects), so it is therefore important that developments are designed and located to prevent or minimize these. This objective requires the likely impacts of proposed developments on specific populations to be quantified, along with their associated uncertainties. A series of quantitative tools based on statistical or mathematical models can be used to estimate population-level effects under various impact scenarios. This is done by estimating in stages (a) the current, baseline, spatial interaction between individuals from the population and the footprint of the proposed development, (b) the likely effects of this development upon these individuals, in relation to both direct and indirect mortality, at an annual level, and (c) the consequences of these levels of annual mortality for the long-term viability of the population. Statistics is key to this process, with statistical models of aerial at sea survey data and/or GPS tracking data informing the first step, stochastic mechanistic models of collision and/displacement informing the second, and matrix population models informing the final step. Importantly, key sources of uncertainty and variability are captured within, and propagated between, stages to be incorporated in the final outputs of an assessment.In this talk we illustrate the general statistical issues associated with addressing this problem, and outline current work to try and address these issues in the United Kingdom. In particular, we will describe the statistical approach taken within a project, funded through the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund and commissioned through the Scottish Government, to develop a “Cumulative Effects Framework”, which is designed to provide a user-friendly tool for quantifying the impacts of the in-combination impacts of multiple developments.
Explicitly testing for population trends using noisy ecological dataAccurately estimating population trends is an important goal of ecological monitoring with major implications for endangered species and their populations. We here present a Bayesian model that directly infers such changes in population trends while accounting for the uncertainty associated with noisy survey data. By focusing on change, our method naturally allows to combine data from multiple survey methods such as track counts, camera trap images or distance sampling records. We focus on answering two relevant questions for ecological management: (1) Is a population increasing or decreasing in size? (2) Has a population trend changed after a specific intervention? This knowledge provides a direct way to evaluate an intervention or policy change by testing whether a negative trend is slowed or even possibly reversed. It also acts as an early warning tool in case of a novel or increased threat (e.g. intensified poaching) by testing whether a negative trend is increased. We can address these questions by determining the posterior probabilities of the rate parameter in our model. Importantly, absolute abundances are not required to answer these questions: the parameters of interest are readily inferred from measures proportional to absolute abundances only. We gain additional statistical power by modelling the sampling process explicitly, in contrast to linear models of population trends that may include observational effort as a covariate. To show its applicability, we ran our model on time series camera trap and track count data from 2012-2020, sampled in the Chinko Nature Reserve in Central Africa. We show that population trends of all apex predator species (lion 'Panthera leo', leopard 'Panthera pardus', spotted hyena 'Crocuta crocuta' and wild dog 'Lycaon pictus') recovered from a steady decline after the beginning of active law enforcement in 2016 and the introduction of strict controls around the park to keep pastoralists and their livestock out.
Estimating density dependence using Integrated Population Models: an evaluation of current and alternative methodsPopulation size can influence life history traits that will typically in turn affect population size. Such limitation of population size at high density can lead to to population trajectories tending towards an equilibrium population size which is of central interest from both theoretical and management perspectives. Integrated population models (IPM) represent an elegant and logical way to study density dependence as they model jointly demographic traits and population size accounting for uncertainty and demographic and environmental stochasticity, and allow to estimate density dependence of the demographic traits and derive its strength on population growth.However, it is not well known in which situations IPMs provide unbiased estimates of density dependence. Notably, while density dependence on demographic parameters can be assessed and evaluated explicitly within the IPM, density dependence on population growth rate is typically assessed ad hoc and its accuracy may depend on the method used (e.g. correlations or regressions). Its bias may be assessed in cases where density dependence is absent, yet, bias and precision in estimates of density dependence using IPMs in absence of density dependence has not been evaluated.The aim of our study is first to assess how common and strong are biases in the estimated density dependence of demographic parameters and population growth when using IPMs, and second how do detect, and best deal with such biases. To this aim, we simulate various scenarios manipulating factors that likely affect bias (strength of density dependence, length of the time series, life history pace, presence of immigration, sample sizes and strength of environmental stochasticity). We then compare estimates of density dependence using density-dependent-explicit IPM versus using IPMs that account for environmental stochasticity but do not model density dependence. We assess density dependence on population growth using the classically used regression and correlation methods, but also i) adapting suggestions from Lande's work to estimate density dependence as well as the equilibrium population size, and ii) building on transient Life Table Response Experiment contributions to estimate the proportion of variance in population growth rate explained by density dependence on the demographic parameters.
A multi-method approach to study outdoor recreation interaction with red deerIn Scotland, red deer are distributed in multi-purpose landscapes where they coexist with hikers. This coexistence can impact red deer spatio-temporal distribution and behaviour (e.g. mating, vigilance) which can lead to potential conflict with essential deer management activities. This study aimed to investigate spatio-temporal distribution of red deer depending on the presence of hikers using a novel multi-method approach which associated camera traps and GPS data. We deployed camera traps at different distances from a popular hiking path over three summers. At the same time, we sampled hikers with personal GPS loggers to capture hiking activity. We collected more than 250,000 photos of red deer and more than 250 individual GPS traces of hikers. From these, we estimated the time necessary for a red deer detection following a hiking activity close to a camera trap. We used survival analysis to estimate the time necessary for red deer detection. In a second time, we estimated the distance between a camera trap detection of red deer and a hiker presence. We used logistical regressions to analyse these different distances. We found that the chance of a red deer detection after the detection of a hiker was 50% after 24h. The time necessary to observe a red deer after the presence of a hiker was more important at close distances from the hiking path (<25m) than further away from the hiking path. This suggests that red deer are less resilient to the presence of hikers close to the hiking path than further away. These results are of importance for red deer management in Scotland and for the potential use of camera traps and GPS data together for wildlife management and conservation.
Integrating multiple data sources for species’ distribution models to evaluate management effects on focal bird speciesCombining multiple sources of information with theory-inspired models and biological applications can increase the temporal and spatial scale of inference to answer conservation and management questions and increase efficiencies in data collection. Data integration methods for species’ distribution models (SDMs) combine both structured (i.e., presence-absence surveys) and unstructured (i.e., volunteer-surveys) data. Most applications of data integration for SDMs have focused on conservation questions, with few applications to management. With management applications, focal species are primarily selected based on habitat relationships aligned with desired resource conditions and secondly based on feasibility in monitoring population trends. Insufficient detections with focal species are possible in monitoring programs, especially when species are rarer on the landscape due to limited habitat, low population size, or both. Innovative statistical approaches to integrating such data sources with SDMs can increase inference with rare focal species. We use a case study to illustrate differences in occupancy precision gain using data integration with SDMs of focal forest bird species that are comparatively rare (Ruby-crowned Kinglet[Regulus calendulai]) versus common (Grace’s Warbler [Setophaga graciae]) within a National Forest in the United States. In our application, we consider the temporal and spatial mismatch in sampling effort and observation data when integrating a novel set of data sources from eBird and Integrated Monitoring in Bird Conservation Regions. This approach could inform broad scale monitoring efforts of focal species in response to management actions and illustrates the potential of partnerships with volunteer-based organizations for broad monitoring efforts to increase data collection efficiencies and shared stewardship of public lands.
A penalized likelihood for multispecies occupancy models improves estimates of species interactionsOccurrence of species in space is influenced by biotic and abiotic environmental conditions. Interspecific interactions are important biotic conditions that are likely to have a strong influence on species distributions. As a consequence, contemporary statistical ecology research has focused on developing applications of joint species distribution modeling and multi-species occupancy modeling. A common challenge when modeling species interactions occurs when species are rarely or never observed at the same location. This can often be explained by spatial covariates, but strongly negative interactions between species can also lead to lack of observed co-occurrence and cause estimation problems in certain classes of multi-species occupancy models. In particular, failing to observe co-occurrences can lead to separation, whereby estimates of species interaction terms and their standard errors can be unreasonably large, often as a result of boundary estimates. In this talk, we demonstrate the application of a penalized likelihood to multi-species occupancy models when species are rarely or never observed at the same location. A penalized likelihood imposes a penalty on large absolute values of coefficient estimates, shrinking estimates toward 0. By imposing this penalty, a small amount of bias is introduced in coefficient estimates in return for a substantial reduction in estimated variance. We report simulation results demonstrating that when species are rarely or never detected at the same site, a penalized likelihood substantially reduces mean squared error and incidence of boundary estimates of estimated species interaction terms. However, we also demonstrate that at sample sizes common for many ecological studies, coverage of estimated species interaction terms may be lower than nominal, leading to overly precise estimates. We follow this with an application to avian point count survey data collected in the central Appalachian Mountains, USA. We highlight the problem of separation when estimating co-occurrence probability between two potentially interacting species that are never observed at the same site. We then demonstrate how a penalized likelihood can overcome such problems in practice and allow meaningful inference. We believe ourapplication, which has been integrated into the Program R package “unmarked”, will be useful to many users of multi-species occupancy models.
Examining homogenisation and ecological filtering of bird communities in three major South African citiesWith ongoing urbanisation and a looming climate and biodiversity crisis, more attention must be given to sustainably designing the spaces we inhabit and to sharing them with nature. Understanding the distribution of biodiversity around urban areas can help us in creating more biodiverse cities. Current research suggests that cities tend to favour certain species, resulting in similar communities - they are drivers of biotic homogenisation, and filtering of surrounding communities. This study made use of data from the Southern African Bird Atlas Project (SABAP2) to examine the country’s three major urban centres – Cape Town, Durban and Gauteng. Each city is embedded in a vastly different regional bird community. If these cities act as ecological filters, we expect their bird communities to be nested within the regional communities. If the cities act as homogenisers, we expect different city's communities to be more similar to each other than to their surrounding regional communities. We conducted multi-species occupancy modelling on a selected set of species in each city, to determine their response to cover of urban sealed surfaces, urban lawn, and urban vegetated area. We then used the modelled occupancy probabilities of each species to calculate alpha and beta diversity, as well as functional composition, in a subset of the most and least urban pentads (grid cells) of each city. In Durban, urban pentads saw a decrease in diversity relative to surrounding rural pentads, as we would have expected. In Cape Town and Johannesburg however, the opposite was true, and urban areas were actually more diverse. Durban therefore showed evidence of ecological filtering, while Cape Town and Gauteng did not. Looking at beta diversity measures we found that each city closely resembled its surrounding bird community and was different from the other cities. We thus did not find evidence of homogenised urban communities. Trends in functional groups reflected similar patterns. Our study shows how citizen science datasets and multi-species modelling can be used to determine whether cities in this understudied region mirror observations of urban biotic communities in other regions, thereby allowing for conservation recommendations more specific to eachcity’s species.
Diet analysis using generalized linear models derived from foraging processes using R package mvtweedieDiet analysis integrates a wide variety of visual, chemical and biological identification of prey. Samples are often treated as compositional data, where each prey is analyzed as a continuous percentage of the total. However, analyzing compositional data results in analytical challenges, e.g., highly parameterized models or prior transformation of data. Here, we present a novel approximation involving a Tweedie generalized linear model (GLM). We first review how this approximation emerges from considering predator foraging as a thinned and marked point process (with marks representing prey species and individual prey size). This derivation can motivate future theoretical and applied developments. We then provide a practical tutorial for the Tweedie GLM using new package mvtweedie that extends capabilities of widely used packages in R (mgcv and ggplot2) by transforming output to calculate prey compositions. We demonstrate this approach and software using two examples. Tufted puffins (Fratercula cirrhata) provisioning their chicks on a colony in the northern Gulf of Alaska show decadal prey switching among sand lance and prowfish (1980-2000) and then Pacific herring and capelin (2000-2020), while wolves (Canis lupus ligoni) in Southeast Alaska forage on mountain goats and marmots in northern uplands and marine mammals in seaward island coastlines.
Combining different genetic data types and additional ecological covariates in population genetic analysesBiologists use both nuclear DNA (inherited from both parents) and mitochondrial DNA (inherited maternally) to determine which individuals of a given species cluster into distinct populations with separate genepools. They also collect increasing amounts of auxiliary data such as dietary isotopes or behavioural and environmental covariates. The information is used to better manage those populations. Although many genetic clustering methods exist, none of them can combine nuclear and mitochondrial DNA data, and few can incorporate non-genetic data so biologists are currently forced to analyse the various data types separately and manually piece together the conclusions.We are working on a method to cluster combinations of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA data, along with additional covariates that may be categorical or continuous. The first step is to modify the widely-used STRUCTURE software to accommodate both nuclear and mitochondrial data in the same analysis. The second step, incorporating non-genetic covariates, will produce a novel clustering algorithm using a technique known as 'surrogate residuals', which are akin to randomised quantile residuals (or PIT residuals). Essentially, we will convert any categorical variables into continuous values that adhere to the ordinal structure of the original data, and then will cluster those converted categorical variables along with any data that are already continuous. This approach will be fast, and scalable to thousands of SNPs.The new method will be particularly valuable for migratory species such as whales, for which mitochondrial DNA patterns can indicate maternally-mediated elements of migratory behaviours. We will focus on data from southern right whales and humpback whales, but these methods will be applicable to hundreds of other animal species.In the presentation we will discuss the workings of the new algorithm, and illustrate it with an ecological case study.
Four principles for improved statistical ecologySound statistical research practices are difficult to accomplish without proper training or guidelines. Poor practices such as HARKing, cherry-picking, and inadequate reporting practice are common in ecology, as with most sciences, and can lead to high false positive rates, lack of replicability and other research waste. A discussion group at vISEC2020 considered how to help ecologists understand and prioritise the most impactful and important statistical research practices, identifying four guiding principles:First, define a precise research question, then plan sampling and analysis to answer it.Develop a model that accounts for the distribution and dependence of your data.Emphasise effect sizes to replace statistical significance with ecological relevance.Report your methods in sufficient detail so that your research is valid and reproducible.They are listed in approximate order of importance and impact. Defining research questions precisely before any data is collected can completely eliminate HARKing, especially when paired with registration, which has the additional benefit of eliminating cherry-picking. Developing a plan for sampling helps to better answer research questions, leading to more meaningful and impactful results, and increases the likelihood true effects are found (statistical power) with better sampling design. Correctly modelling data also increases power, and controls the rate of false positives. Emphasising effect sizes puts the focus on ecological relevance, which is the most meaningful result of ecological research. Comprehensive reporting of methods allows others to successfully replicate your study, thereby lending more weight to findings and moving the field forward.
Accounting for GPS Error in Habitat-Selection StudiesHabitat-selection studies aim to understand animal behavior and resource preferences by comparing locations animals visit to locations assumed available to them. Collection of such data relies on modern biotelemetry devices (e.g., GPS collars) that allow remote monitoring of multiple individuals at relatively fine temporal scales. Although positioning technologies have been improving quickly over the last several decades, there always remains some level of measurement error associated with GPS locations. I will use an existing heuristic error correction method called Simulation Extrapolation (SIMEX) to explore the effect of measurement error on the estimates of habitat-selection parameters resulting from step-selection analyses. The SIMEX method allows us to investigate whether and how GPS error causes bias in the estimated regression parameters, and at the same time provides an approach to correct for at least part of the bias.Furthermore, SIMEX is a simple and intuitive method that does not require the formulation of an explicit error model. The use of SIMEX to tackle the issue of GPS error will be illustrated with simulations, as well as with a case study on sandhill cranes. The results suggest that GPS error introduces non-negligeable bias in the resulting parameters of habitat-selection analyses, and that SIMEX is a promising method to understand this bias, even though correcting it remains a complex matter.
Design-Unbiased Trapezoid Area-Under-the-Curve Estimators for Estimating Salmon EscapementIn the latest statistical review of methods for the estimation of salmon escapement (Parsons and Skalski, 2010), area-under-the-curve (AUC) methods were one of the recommended methods. Perhaps the most common AUC method is the trapezoid AUC (TAUC) method, which linearly interpolates periodic counts of live salmon and calculates the area under the interpolated curve to form the numerator of the escapement estimator. TAUC is the most popular approach to AUC estimation because it is straightforward to implement and it is immune to model misspecification due to its non parametric nature.Despite these advantages, there is not currently any statistically founded recommended practice for the selection of the sampling times. In fact, for sampling times selected deterministically, it has been shown that the TAUC estimator cannot be unbiased for the AUC (unless all the days are sampled.) In practice, the sample size is often very small due to budget constraints and therefore the bias can be consequential.An important perspective that has yet to be explored is to eliminate this bias by considering probabilistic mechanisms for selecting the sampling days. In this work, we show that a judiciously chosen probabilistic sampling mechanism (systematic sampling, simple random sampling or Bernoulli sampling) combined with a judicious choice of end-adjustments for the TAUC estimator allows unbiased estimation of the AUC. In addition, a variance estimator is proposed. The theoretical results are supported by a simulation study and illustrated on salmon counts collected in the Pacific Northwest.Overall, this work provides guidance to fisheries managers on how to optimally sample their count data to avoid bias and optimize the accuracy of TAUC estimators for the estimation of salmon escapement.Moreover, it challenges Parsons and Skalski's (2010) conclusion that it is preferable to estimate the AUC by averaging the counts rather than using a TAUC estimator because this conclusion was drawn under the previous understanding that TAUC estimators could not be unbiased.
An integrated occupancy - abundance model for estimating species interactionsSpecies occurrence is driven by complex networks of interspecific interactions (e.g. predation, competition, disease) and environmental conditions. Current approaches for examining interspecific interactions through multispecies occupancy modelling are limited by an approach that is focused on co-occurrence. A focus on patterns of co-occurrence restricts inferences on the role of interspecific interactions in driving species occurrence to exceedingly strong interspecific actions resulting in exclusion of one species, which are very rare. A more common scenario exists, where species have strong interactions, however, these are countered by mechanisms for co-existence e.g. fine-scale spatial / temporal avoidance. Thus, we propose an integrated occupancy-abundance model that models the occurrence of one species in response to the abundance of another. We adapt the single-species occupancy model to include one or more nested n- mixture models for interacting species. We propose that a nested design that allows for updating of the n- mixture model with every iteration of the occupancy model greatly improves robustness comparative to applying single values from a separate model as is becoming common practice. As an example, we model a well-studied top-down interaction between an expanding dominant mesopredator; the coyote (Canis latrans) and two smaller native carnivores; the red fox (Vulpes vulpes) and the grey fox (Urocyon cineroargenteus) from a landscape scale camera trap survey conducted between 2013 – 2021 in New York. USA. We compare the outputs of an existing multi-species co-occurrence model with our integrated occupancy-abundance model. We show that whilst a co-occurrence approach reports positive co- occurrence between the coyote and the subordinate species, the integrated occupancy-abundance model demonstrates that high abundance of coyotes lowers the occurrence of the red fox, but not the grey fox, with differences likely due to higher availability of refuges to the arboreal grey fox lowering population-level impacts. Our model has wide applications for investigating the role of interspecific interactions in structuring ecological communities and thereby informing evidence-based management of animal populations where contemporary methods cannot. This approach represents a key improvement in our ability to make community level inferences on the occurrence of species that are subject to imperfect detection.
A protocol for reproducible functional diversity analysesThe widespread use of species traits to infer community assembly mechanisms or to link species to ecosystem functions has led to an exponential increase in functional diversity analyses, with >10,000 papers published in 2010–2019, and >1,500 papers only in 2020. This interest is reflected in the development of a multitude of theoretical and methodological frameworks for calculating functional diversity, making it challenging to navigate the myriads of options and to report details to reproduce a trait-based analysis.Therefore, the study of functional diversity would benefit from the existence of a general guideline for standard reporting and good practices in this discipline. We devise an eight-step protocol to guide ecologists in conducting and reportingfunctional diversity analyses. We do so by streamlining available terminology, concepts, and methods, with the overarching goal of increasing reproducibility, transparency and comparability across studies. The protocol is based on the following key elements: identification of a research question, a sampling scheme and a study design, assemblage of community and trait data matrices, data exploration and preprocessing, functional diversity computation, model fitting, evaluation and interpretation, and data, metadata and code provision. Throughout the protocol, we provide information on how to best select research questions and study designs, and discuss ways to ensure reproducibility in reporting results. To facilitate the implementation of this protocol, we further developed an interactive web-based application (stepFD) in the form of a checklist workflow, detailing all the steps of the protocol and providing tabular and graphical outputs that can be merged to produce a final report. The protocol streamlined here is expected to promote the description of functional diversity analyses in sufficient detail to ensure full transparency and reproducibility. A thorough reporting of functional diversity analyses ensures that ecologists can incorporate others’ findings into meta-analyses, the shared data can be integrated into larger databases for consensus analyses, and available code can be reused by other researchers. All these elements are key to push forward this vibrant and fast-growing field of research.
Can ecological forecasting help mitigate the risk of collision between whales and commercial vessels? The case of the endangered Southern Resident Killer WhalesEcology is becoming a more predictive science as new technologies for tracking animals and their environment become available, and statistical approaches for the fusion of dynamic movement models with data are becoming more accessible to ecologists. The endangered Southern Resident Killer Whales (SRKW) spend significant time in the Salish Sea off southern British Columbia, Canada, and northern Washington State, USA, and are exposed to increasing marine traffic in the region. With increased marine traffic comes higher risk of acoustic disturbance and collisions with commercial vessels. With only 73 individuals remaining in December 2021, the loss of a single individual would be catastrophic for the population and the marine ecosystem through cascading effects. Motivated by these concerns, we develop a real-time forecasting system for the endangered SRKW that aims at predicting pod (i.e., matrilineal group) locations with probabilistic predictions of whale directional movement. The statistical framework is based on a state space model and sequential data assimilation, a method for model-data fusion initially developed for numerical weather predictions. Real-time SRKW location information relies on visual sightings from citizen scientists and Passive Acoustic Monitoring (PAM) from a network of underwater hydrophone nodes. This real-time location information is combined with stochastic movement model predictions to provide forecasts of future animal locations and trajectories, as well as estimation of key behavioural parameters.Implementation uses ensemble-based sequential Monte Carlo methods (a particle filter). The movement model is a Continuous Time Correlated Random Walk (CTCRW) that integrates historical SRKW distribution through a drift term computed as the gradient of a potential function. Depending on the abundance and accuracy of location information, our forecasting system can predict the pods’ locations up to 2.5 hours in advance with a moderate prediction error (< 5 km), providing reasonable lead-in time to allow commercial vessels to adjust their speed or path to minimize whale-vessel interactions. We argue that that this ecological forecasting framework can be used to improve the conservation of at-risk populations, synthesize diverse data types, improve animal movement models and behavioural understanding, and has the potential to become an important new direction for movement ecology.
Using Bayesian statistics to better inform the monitoring design of indigenous seacountryCurrently, much of Australia's northern inshore waters lacks baseline monitoring data to provide an understanding of the natural variability in ecological communities. Australian indigenous people have a cultural obligation to look after their sea country, and indigenous-partnered science is beginning to drive socially just increases in conservation. The Australian Institute of Marine Science has been working in partnership with indigenous communities towards the systematic collection of monitoring data. In this presentation, I will discuss our partnership with the Bardi Jawi Rangers of the remote Kimberley region of Western Australia focussing on a shared 3-year monitoring data-set for fish and corals. In particular, I will focus on how we have been using Bayesian statistics to 1) analyse the effectiveness of the sampling design as currently implemented, and 2) break the barrier of communication between scientists and indigenous partners.
Hidden Markov and semi-Markov models: When and why are these models useful for classifiyng statein time series data?Hidden Markov models (HMMs) and their extensions have proven to be powerful tools for classification of observations that stem from systems with temporal dependence as they take into account that observations close in time are likely generated from the same state (i.e. class). When information on the classes of the observations is available in advanced, supervised methods can be applied. In this paper, we providedetails for the implementation of four models for classification in a supervised learning context: HMMs, hidden semi-Markov models (HSMMs), autoregressive-HMMs, and autoregressive-HSMMs. Using simulations, we study the classification performance under various degrees of model misspecification to characterize when it would be important to extend a basic HMM to an HSMM. As an application of these techniques we use the models to classify accelerometer data from Merino sheep to distinguish between four different behaviors of interest. In particular in the field of movement ecology, collection of fine-scale animal movement data over time to identify behavioral states has become ubiquitous, necessitating models that can account for the dependencestructure in the data. We demonstrate that when the aim is to conduct classification, various degrees of model misspecification of the proposed model may not impede good classification performance unless there is high overlap between the state-dependent distributions, that is, unless the observation distributions of the different states are difficult to differentiate.
Anthropogenic land-use change shapes bird diversity along the eastern Himalayan altitudinal gradientGlobally, the conversion of natural forest into agricultural land and human settlement has altered avian diversity and structure often leading to functional and/or phylogenetic homogenisation. While the effects of land-use change on avian functional and phylogenetic diversity is well studied in the tropics, it is poorly understood and scarcely studied in the Himalayas let alone in eastern Himalayan bird communities.Using data from replicated transect surveys, we investigated the effects of land-use change (agriculture, settlement, and forest) on the community diversity and structure of 336 bird species while accounting for imperfect detection across 679-point count locations along an elevational gradient in the eastern Himalayan biodiversity hotspot of Bhutan.The main findings of our study are 1) bird community occupancy along the elevational gradient is negatively associated with human land use (agriculture and settlement), 2) bird assemblages at higher elevations were functionally and phylogenetically clustered, and 3) agriculture and settlement harboured disproportionately higher functional and phylogenetic diversity whereas forest had phylogenetically diverse communities within functionally convergent traits.Our findings suggest that high functional diversity in agriculture and settlement offers an opportunity for a broad range of ecosystem services such as pollination, insect- and rodent-pest control. Agricultural practices that protect and improve bird-friendly habitats (particularly for insectivores) should be promoted. To facilitate coexistence, educational programmes on the importance of the functional roles of birds should be implemented to raise farmers’ awareness of the importance of farmland biodiversity. Management interventions should seek to integrate bird conservation and farm production. Safeguarding edge habitats and forests abutting human settlements would be key to promoting phylogenetically diverse assemblages and ecological functions in Himalayan working landscapes.
Positive-Unlabeled learning to identify forced labor at seaForced labor is a known problem in fisheries. However, the lack of data makes it hard to truly assess the extent of the problem. Here we use a machine learning approach to identify fishing vessels associated with forced labor. The model (a combination of random forests) trains on cases from reported vessels and uses a set of vessel characteristics and movement metrics obtained from worldwide tracking data to identify patterns of forced labor. Training and prediction are performed on a yearly basis, i.e. we are able to predict—for historical data—if a vessel had a high risk of forced labor at a given past year. Because we do not have enough reliable data on vessels that did not use in forced labor to train the model, we use positive- unlabeled (PU) learning; that is, a procedure to use positive cases—vessels with forced labor—alongside cases with an unknown class. Our model returns confidence scores for forced labor. We then used adensity-based approach called the dedpul algorithm to find a threshold to classify between high risk and low risk of forced labor. The model proved to correctly identify vessels with and without forced labor. While this is a promising result, the data used for validation (and training) may not be representative of the diversity of forced labor cases in the world. We would like to discuss this and other caveats in our presentation. We believe that this machine learning approach is not only useful for fisheries management but also for other applications in ecology that may not have negative cases to train models.
A Bayesian hierarchical modelling approach to estimating landbird detectability in a multi-species contextThe NA-POPS project (https://na-pops.org) has developed an open-access database of detectability estimates for well over 300 species of North American landbirds to date. These detectability estimates are produced using the QPAD methodology developed by the Boreal Avian Modelling project. QPAD allows for estimates of the components of detectability (availability and perceptibility) for a given bird species to be derived from heterogenous removal and distance sampling methods, given a set of covariates and a sufficient number of data points. In cases where insufficient data is available for a given species, detectability estimates cannot be derived using the traditional QPAD methods. However, because bird species traits such as song pitch, body size, and habitat preference have been shown to predict detectability, species with similar traits may have similar detectability. Therefore, we can take advantage of information from data-rich species with specific traits to help inform estimates of detectability for data- sparse species with similar traits. One way to share information between units is by using hierarchical Bayesian models. Here, we present a hierarchical Bayesian implementation of the QPAD methodology that allows for estimates of availability and perceptibility to be derived within a multi-species context, allowing for the sharing of information between species with similar traits. Using designed simulation studies, we first demonstrate the validity of this Bayesian implementation by comparing results from this implementation to the current maximum likelihood QPAD models. Then, we show how this Bayesian implementation can improve detectability estimates for a simulated data sparse species that is modelled in a multi-species context with other simulated data-rich species. Finally, we apply this Bayesian implementation to the NA-POPS database, where we show how the sharing of information can help predict detectability of data-sparse species that NA-POPS could not previously model. This Bayesian QPAD framework is the next step in producing accurate detectability estimates for as many North American landbird species as possible. In turn, these detectability estimates will allow for better estimates of population sizes, and can facilitate data integration across disparate survey types.
Building a framework for adaptive management of an invasive speciesEstimates of population spread and growth rates are fundamental to identification of optimal allocation of invasive species removal effort. Novel insights into invasive population dynamics can be gained from spatially-structured removal and monitoring data collected during a removal effort. In this study, we evaluated the degree to which different monitoring data streams influence management outcomes based on their ability to inform the decision-making process through estimates of the rate of growth and spread of rusty crayfish in the John Day River, a major tributary of the Columbia River. We built an integrated population model to simulate rusty crayfish population dynamics within the context of an adaptive management framework and evaluated the efficacy of potential monitoring and analysis strategies in promoting informed decision making and favorable management outcomes. We assumed a fixed budget for monitoring and management and simulations were run over a fixed time frame. At the end of each simulation, the number of individuals remaining on the landscape and total river length occupied was assessed. We found that integrating all available monitoring data streams produced the best management outcome and most accurate abundance measures.
Genetic Mark-Recapture Methods for Estimating Seasonal River Run Size of Stock PopulationsGenetic mark-recapture (GMR) is a statistical technique used in estimating population size in ecology. By combining genetic data on the relative abundance of species from a sample with population counts obtained for only some of the species, GMR allows the estimation of the total population size and the contributions of each species. The current method is based on the Lincoln-Petersen estimator and provides an asymptotically unbiased estimate for the total population size. However, the variance estimator does not account for the uncertainty in the sampling process of the genetics data. As a result, this approach can suffer from a significantly underestimated variance, especially when the relative proportions in the genetic sample differ from those in the population. In this work, we propose a novel Bayesian GMR framework to address this issue. The Bayesian framework can explicitly incorporate the sampling error in the genetic sample and lends itself nicely to combining additional sources of data into a single model, such as capture- recapture data or telemetry data, which are also frequently used to estimate population size. The effectiveness of the new method is investigated via simulation studies and used to estimate the abundance of Sockeye Salmon in the Taku River.
Jaguarundi four ways: a comparison of range-wide distribution and habitat association estimates from four occupancy model extensionsUnderstanding the range-wide distribution and habitat associations of carnivores is critical for the effective conservation of ecosystems, particularly in the face of ongoing habitat change and degradation. Yet many carnivores remain understudied, especially those that are not charismatic megafauna or umbrella species. Range-wide analyses often require combining disparate datasets from multinational research groups providing another obstacle to these analyses. Jaguarundi (Puma yagouaroundi), a felid mesocarnivore, is an understudied and elusive species that ranges broadly from southern North America through South America.We used a camera trapping dataset amassed from multiple research partners and for the most part not originally targeted at the species to assess environmental covariates that influence jaguarundi occurrence. Our dataset was compiled from 178 unique survey projects spanning 13 countries and 19 years. The temporal and spatial scale of each survey varied substantially, so collectively, the dataset did not satisfy standard single-species, single-season occupancy model assumptions and simultaneously did not support fitting of more complex dynamic occupancy models. Many extensions to occupancy models have been developed to relax assumptions and to evaluate datasets covering broad temporal and spatial scales, however the benefits and drawbacks for each of these methodologies are not easily evaluated.Here, we explore similarities and differences of the estimated influence of a suite of remotely-sensed environmental covariates on jaguarondi occurrence assessed through four occupancy model frameworks:(1) a standard single-season occupancy model with relaxed assumptions (estimating site use), (2) a ‘stacked design’ occupancy model with a random effect for site, (3) a temporal auto-logistic occupancy model with occurrence dependent on the previous time step, and (4) a continuous-time, multi-temporal scale occupancy model. While some covariates (distance to road, distance to water, distance to developed area) were consistently significant among all or several frameworks, other covariates related more specifically to forest or vegetation cover (gross primary productivity, NDVI, EVI, forest cover) varied in significance among models. For conservation practitioners using complex and aggregated datasets, evaluating several model implementations may provide a fuller assessment of range-wide species distributions and habitat associations.
A comparison of predictive performance of joint species distribution models for presence-absence dataWhile there has been substantial literature on the evaluation of predictions from single species distribution models, the topic of prediction has only recently begun to be addressed for joint species distribution models (JSDMs). These studies have been limited in what aspects of prediction they cover: limited selection of models being compared, limited number of evaluation metrics, and/or not comparing the different prediction types available to JSDMs. In this study we perform a large scale comparison of the predictive performance of eight models: two stacked species distribution models (SSDMs) and six JSDMs. We fit these models to 22 real and simulated datasets, undertake four JSDM prediction types, and evaluate up to 32 metrics from five different classes that analyse different aspects of species distributions and the community assemblage process. We found that likelihood-based metrics indicated the JSDMs were better fit to the data than the SSDM, but that most other metric classes showed the SSDM outperforming the JSDMs by generally small amounts. The spatial and non-spatial implementations of the hierarchical multivariate probit regression model with latent factors typically performed better than the other JSDMs, but overall still performed worse than the SSDM. The SSDM predictions constrained with the spatially-explicit species assemblage modelling framework (SESAM) consistently outperformed both the SSDM and all JSDMs for both species- and community-level metrics. Our results indicate that despite the additional inference they provide about the community assemblage process by accounting for the residual association between species, JSDMs generally perform worse predictions than stacked single species models when evaluated at either the species or community level. The strong performance of the SESAM framework suggests that applying it to JSDM predictions is an interesting future avenue of research.
A spatial capture-recapture model with spatial clustering of detections within individual capture historiesSpatial capture-recapture (SCR) models are commonly used to estimate animal density from surveys on which detectors passively detect animals without physical capture, for example, using camera traps, hair snares, or microphones. An individual is more likely to be recorded by detectors close to its activity center, the centroid of its movement throughout the survey. Existing models to account for this spatial heterogeneity in detection probabilities rely on an assumption of independence between detection records at different detectors conditional on the animals' activity centers, which are treated as latent variables.In this talk, I describe various ways in which this conditional independence assumption may be violated due to the way animals move around the survey region and encounter detectors, such that additional spatial correlation is almost inevitable. I will describe a model we developed to address this problem, which includes a latent detection field for each individual, and illustrate its use via both a simulation study and an application to a camera-trap survey of snow leopards (Panthera uncia). Standard SCR population density estimators are biased when these additional spatial effects are present, but our method mitigates this bias. Our model unifies several existing SCR approaches, with special cases including standard SCR, models that account for nonspatial individual heterogeneity, and models with overdispersed detection counts.
Clustering Cues Creates Clues to Count CreaturesWhen a cue, such as a chirp from a frog, is recaptured on multiple microphones we can use spatial capture- recapture methods to estimate cue density. When we know who makes the cue, we are then able to estimate animal density. In this talk we cluster cues using their spatial location as the clue to count how many creatures are in the community. We present a marked Poisson process representation of spatial capture-recapture which acts as a mixture-model when the identity of the cues is unknown. We demonstrate through a simulation study that we can successfully estimate animal density using a small number of traps with accurate time of arrival information. The method is applied to Lightfoot's moss frog, an endemic species to South Africa that is threatened by habitat loss.
A Gibbs sampler for multi-species occupancy modelsMulti-species occupancy (MSO) models use detection-nondetection data from several species observed at different locations to estimate the probability that a particular species occupies a particular location. The models are particularly useful for estimating the occupancy probabilities associated with rare species since they are seldom observed when undertaking field surveys. In this, article we develop Gibbs sampling algorithms that can be used to fit various Bayesian MSO models to detection-nondetection data. Bayesian analysis of these models can be undertaken using statistical packages such as JAGS and Stan, however, since these packages were not developed specifically to fit occupancy models, one often experiences long run times when undertaking analysis.In a single-season (single-species) nonspatial and spatial occupancy modelling context, Clark and Altwegg (2019), show that special purpose Gibbs samplers can produce posterior chains that mix faster and have larger expected sampling rates (Holmes and Held (2006)) than those obtained using JAGS and Stan. These results suggest that such algorithms could potentially lead to significant reductions in the run-times of MSO models.This article illustrates how to fit MSO models when the detection and occupancy processes are modelled using logit link functions and apply these methods to a camera-trapping study undertaken by Drouilly et al. 2018. Variable selection is undertaken using a reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo (Barker and Link (2013)) algorithm. We found that the Gibbs sampling algorithm developed produces posterior samples that are identical to those obtained when using Stan, resulting in faster run times and has a larger expected sampling rate than Stan when analysing the above-referenced data set.
The Interplay of Demographic Stochasticity and Environmental noise in Population DynamicsMultiple factors determine a population’s viability. For a population that can persist indefinitely under deterministic forces (i.e., a reasonably low intrinsic rate of increase to avert deterministic chaos), its fate can still become uncertain when facing environmental noise. Environmental stochasticity affects not only the survival of individuals but also their fecundity and thus population recruitment. Demographic processes, such as survival and fecundity, are inherently stochastic, reflecting the ensemble of individual events (survival, death, birth, etc.). Such three destabilising forces (deterministic chaos, environmental noise, and demographic stochasticity), thus, jointly moderate a population’s viability and extinction probability. In the early attempts to formulate population viability, scientists have largely focused on the conditions leading to deterministic chaos and the role of demographic stochasticity in combination with random (white) environmental noise. In this work, we model the population dynamics of species with non-overlapping generations using the logistic difference equation, implementing both demographic stochasticity using negative binomial distribution for individual demographic events (survival and fecundity) and 1/f colour environmental stochasticity. We show that the population viability differs under white versus red and pink noise. The risk of extinction tends to decrease as the environmental stochasticity shifts from colour noise to white noise; that is, the persistence and viability of a population can be uplifted when environmental noise loses its colour. Furthermore, the risk of extinction increases intuitively as the probability of survival decreases. We, therefore, add to the ongoing debate in the population viability analysis that colour noise and demographic stochasticity jointly contribute to the moderation of population persistence and extinction risks.
Woody-plant encroachment leads to widespread occupancy declines in southern Africa’s birdsWoody-plant encroachment can act as an ecological filter for animal populations, through changes in habitat structure and landscape heterogeneity. These changes may impact biodiversity, species distributions and community assemblages. Wide-scale citizen science sampling efforts, such as the South African Bird Atlas Project (SABAP) improve our ability to look for widespread changes in population dynamics beyond the site or community scale. Here we aimed to identify 1) the responses of passerine birds to woody cover change, and 2) the importance of ecological strategies in driving these responses.We used hierarchical multi-season occupancy models to analyse changes in bird occupancy over a ten-year period (2007-2016) in response to woody-plant encroachment. We fitted these occupancy models for each of 266 bird species across South Africa, Lesotho and eSwatini’s grassland and savanna biomes, using SABAP2 observation data and remotely sensed woody cover change products. This led us to identify species that were either winners, losers or neutral in response to increased woody cover. We then tested forrelationships between birds’ occupancy response to increased woody cover and their ecological strategies.We show that most birds (82%) in our analysis have a decreasing occupancy trend, with few showing increasing or stable population dynamics. 81 of 266 species (30%) showed a negative response to increased woody cover. Overall, 24% of the birds were classified as losers, where they have both a decreasing occupancy trend and a negative response to increased woody cover, with only 12 birds (5%) classified as winners. Importantly, both winners and losers showed large spatial variability in occupancy trends, with both increasing and decreasing occupancy across their distribution ranges. We found little evidence for ecological strategies driving the patterns in occupancy responses to increased woody cover, with only two ecological strategies, habitat breadth and clutch size, explaining a small amount of variability across the different bird species.Our findings provide additional evidence for shifting animal distributions and occupancy changes due to woody-plant encroachment. With current woody cover change trends, we predict further occupancy declines across species with a preference for low woody cover and more specialized habitat requirements.
When statistics encounter ecotoxicology - Towards new insights in environmental risk assessmentWithin EU only, more than 100000 man-made chemicals are awaiting assessment of their risk to the environment. Based on statistical analyses providing toxicity indices at different tiers, risk assessment faces today new challenges to meet all expectations in terms of regulatory requirements together with the use of advanced and sound statistical methods. In particular, EFSA today recommends a clear and unambiguously identification of uncertainty sources, the use of TKTD models to refine tier 2 risk assessment in particular for plant protection products acting on aquatic organisms when exposed to environmentally realistic concentration profiles and that models be documented in a transparent way ensuring reproducible results. If plenty ideas, methods and tools already exist in the academic world to meet these expectations, practitioners struggle in appropriate them for reasons mostly attributable to modellers themselves. These reasons mainly come from lacks of support: (1) to easily quantify uncertainties, then their propagation to model outputs and subsequent predictions; (2) to better accept changing paradigm using new modelling approaches often appearing as black boxes, together with a lack of support to fully perceive the concrete added-value of these novelties for their daily work; (3) to easily interpret goodness-of-fit criteria and therefore trust model results in their ability to support decisions from predictions; (4) to appropriate recent user-friendly turn-key facilities, while already recognised as automatically providing toxicity indices of interest in full compliance with regulatory guidelines and risk assessment decision criteria. Based concrete case studies dealt with a suite of convenient and relevant tools freely available within an all-in-one facility, this presentation will illustrate how the above-mentioned difficulties can be overcome to facilitate the use of models in the environmental risk assessment (ERA).
A Semi-structured Citizen Science Scheme that Improves Vascular Plant Monitoring in the NetherlandsVolunteer-based ecological monitoring is traditionally based around highly structured survey designs with rigorous observation protocols and standardised counts, while the last two decades have seen a massive increase in opportunistic observations without any protocol whatsoever. Both of these extremes have their disadvantages, whereas intermediate semi-structured schemes that combine merits of both could be highly beneficial for ecological monitoring. In the Netherlands, vascular plant monitoring required such a recording scheme and a pilot was launched in 2012 to assess if detection probabilities and power to reveal declines were high enough, with the ultimate purpose being distribution trend estimates for as many native plant species as possible. We did not prescribe a strict field protocol, but instead chose to obtain basic information about how the observations were made and statistically correct for variation in observer effort with occupancy models. Moreover, on a yearly basis observers were provided with a selection of grid cells and were motivated to also focus on replicated visits to grid cells that have been surveyed earlier in the season, which is a major requirement of occupancy models. Now that the pilot has finished (2012-2019), we evaluate whether the scheme can produce proper estimates for occupancy, detection, and power. The number of occupied grid cells was estimated using single-species models with day of year, visit duration and observer experience as covariates for detection. The detection probability strongly depended on day of year and visit duration. It was possible to estimate the number of occupied grid cells quite precisely for several hundreds of species, such that the statistical power is expected to be high enough to detect changes of 10% between survey rounds. For rare species, however, the power to detect changes will be quite low. We conclude that the approach works well and that it offers a monitoring solution when structured schemes and standardised counts are difficult to organize, such as in the case of vascular plants, mosses, lichens, bees and hover flies.
Bird's response to seasonality: Investigating the range dynamics of birds through dynamic occupancy models.Birds can respond to seasonal environmental fluctuations through migration. Among different migratory species and populations, there is varying sensitivity to different seasonal environmental cues, thus leading to different seasonal range dynamics and migration strategies. In this study, we used dynamic occupancy models on the South African Bird Atlas Project 2 (SABAP2) data to investigate the seasonal range dynamics of a selection of five migratory and six nomadic bird species in western South Africa. We used dynamic occupancy models to estimate monthly changes in occupancy between 2014 and 2018. We modelled local extinction and colonisation as a function of changes and anomalies in average monthly rainfall, temperature and vegetation. Among the migrants, the best performing models indicated that colonization and extinction parameters were mostly driven by seasonal changes in average rainfall, temperature and vegetation. In nomadic species, colonization was driven by seasonal changes in average rainfall, temperature and vegetation, while extinction was driven by anomalies in rainfall, temperature and vegetation. The models successfully captured the generally known seasonal pattern in occupancy (arrival and departure) of all five migrants, while no seasonal fluctuation in occupancy was evident among the nomadic species. Over the four-year period, no species showed a strong shift in seasonal range dynamics in both groups. However, we do suspect that the same methodology done at a finer scale and possibly longer period may reveal changes in seasonal range dynamics of some species. This study demonstrates that dynamic occupancy modelling using citizen science data is a viable methodology for investigating seasonal range dynamics.
Estimating spatial and density-dependent survival using open-population spatial capture-recapture modelsOpen-population spatial capture-recapture (OPSCR) models use the spatial information contained in individual detections collected over multiple consecutive occasions to estimate occasion-specific density, but also demographic and movement parameters. OPSCR models can also estimate spatial variation in vital rates but such models have not been thoroughly tested. We developed a Bayesian OSPCR model that does not only account for spatial variation in survival using fixed spatial covariates, but also estimate the local density-dependent effects on survival within a unified framework. Using simulations, we show under what conditions the model provides robust inferences of the effect of spatial covariates on survival. Although more data-hungry and challenging to fit, local-density dependent survival can also be estimated using the OPSCR model described here. We also illustrate how this model can be applied to study spatial variation in survival in the Scandinavian wolf population. We provide a set of functionalities in the nimbleSCR package that allow efficient fitting of Bayesian OPSCR models with spatially varying survival. Our study represents an essential step towards a fully spatially explicit OPSCR model that can disentangle the role of spatial drivers of population dynamics.
Scalable spatio-temporal community modelling via Krylov subspace methodsOngoing technological advance has dramatically expanded the set of data collection methods available for community ecologists. Nowadays various recording devices, such as camera traps, audiorecorders and water/air probe samplers, being properly set-up, are capable to operate in effectively autonomous manner constantly. Combined with recent advances in automatic species identification methods from raw recordings, these machines can yield community data on an unprecedented scale in terms of size and collection standardisation. Moreover, all this data is typically automatically annotated with spatial and temporal information, enabling ecologists to assess observed spatio-temporal patterns and better infer community-shaping drivers.However, such big community data also lead to substantial challenges in its analysis. Though joint species distribution models (JSDM) capable to deal with explicit spatio-temporal sampling designs have been introduced half a decade ago, their scalability is far behind of what is required for newly-produced datasets. In this work we specifically aim to alleviate such limitation and develop a method applicable to datasets on hundreds of species recorded for thousands of times in hundreds of locations.We start by revising the common latent-factor-based JSDM formulation and re-introduce spatio-temporal Gaussian process (GP) priors for the latent factors. While such model set-up is fairly simple, its fitting has been the crucial bottleneck of modern methods. More specifically, the existing approach is doomed by involved matrix inversions that scale cubically with respect to the amount of observed spatio-temporal units. We overcome it with carefully designed computations that are inspired by recent successes in GP machine learning literature. Those are based on the following tricks: 1) we constrain to a family of separable GP covariance functions, enabling Matrix Normal distribution compact form, 2) we never explicitly invert large matrices, but use iterative Krylov subspace methods (requiring matrix-vector multiplications only), 3) we design a custom adaptive preconditioner for faster iterative methods’ convergence, and 4) we accelerate the computationally intensive model fitting parts with precompiled GPU-deployable TensorFlow code.We implement our development as an extension of the popular Hmsc package in R, aiming for increased reusability by other ecologists. We demonstrate its performance and efficiency using real data case study.
Simulating animal movement from models derived from integrated step- selection analysesHabitat selection of animals is of central importance for understanding animal behavior, population viability and species distributions. Step-selection analyses (SSA) offer a popular statistical framework for quantifying habitat selection from telemetry data. Recently, it has been shown how one can include functions of step length and turn angles in the linear predictor of the selection function to account for the movement process, leading to what has been referred to as an integrated step-selection analysis (iSSA). By including these predictors, it becomes possible to estimate a selection-free movement kernel in addition to a habitat selection function. This explicit consideration of movement and habitat selection makes it possible to interpret iSSAs as individual-based models of animal movement.Here, we demonstrate how the formulation of the iSSA can be used to derive an individual-based model of animal movement in discrete time and continuous space. At each time step the next position of the animal is determined by sampling from a selection-free movement kernel and a habitat kernel. We then demonstrate straightforward methods for simulating animal movement from models derived from iSSAs. Finally, we illustrate how this approach can be used to generate movement data for simulation studies and how future movements of animals, possibly under altered environmental conditions, can be predicted.
Eats, moults & leaves: estimating grey seal pup production from serial counts at breeding coloniesEstimating pinniped abundance is difficult due to their complex life histories. In the UK, robust estimates of grey seal population size and trends depend on reliable estimates of pup production (i.e., the number of pups born in any one year). Grey seals give birth at breeding colonies over an approximately two-month period. Pups are born white and moult to a greyish brown colour before leaving the colony. This staggered birth, moult, and leaving process means that not all pups are present at the colony at any one time.At most UK breeding colonies, a series of digital photographic aerial surveys are conducted between September and January. During each survey, photographs are taken encompassing the entire breeding colony. In postprocessing, experienced analysts count the numbers of white and moulted seal pups. Pups are not individually identifiable from these photographs. Counts are combined with information on life history parameters to derive a birth curve and estimate pup production.Unfortunately, the model previously used to estimate pup production from these data has fundamental structural limitations that prevent it being adapted for future use. Therefore, we developed a more flexible state-space pup production model that can incorporate age-dependent misclassification errors and be structured hierarchically so that that information from data-rich colonies and years is shared with data-poor colonies and years. We implemented this model in TMB and fit it using maximum likelihood. We show that our model performs well on simulated and real datasets.While this model was developed to estimate grey seal pup production, it could be applied to other taxa for which successive counts of different life stages are collected, and could be used to investigate key ecological questions, including, for example, the impact of climate change on phenology. This could be particularly valuable in situations where not all individuals are present in the same place and time and are not individually identifiable. In future, we would like to explore fitting the model in a Bayesian framework so that prior information on life-history parameters can be included.
A multi-observation-platform habitat suitability model for vampire bat distribution in PeruBats are important reservoirs of emerging infectious diseases, but their nocturnal activity, capacity for flight, and reclusive nature frustrates understanding of their spatial distributions. In Latin America, common vampire bat (Desmodus rotundus) transmitted rabies virus represents a key example of how this uncertainty impedes successful management. Decades of efforts to reduce the burden of lethal rabies infections in livestock and humans by culling bats have had limited success. This is likely because the virus persists via spatial dissemination between colonies, but neither the number nor locations of colonies is known, precluding optimal allocation of culls or other interventions.We will present a Bayesian joint point process model which integrates data on the locations and environmental characteristics of a limited number of vampire bat roosts (N=222) in southern Peru, along with data from 400 questionnaires describing the occurrence of bat bites in livestock, an indirect, but complementary measure of bat presence. The model identifies covariates of roost distribution including elevation and shows considerable reductions in roost detectability in regions that are less accessible.Importantly, the incorporation of bat bite data and landscape covariates enables imputation of the positions of unobserved roosts. Model predictions are validated using an independent dataset of bat roosts in other regions of Peru.Our results identify areas in southern Peru which are predicted to have relatively high abundance of vampire bat colonies yet currently have only sparse occurrence records. Concerningly, some of these areas are geographically proximal to areas of active viral circulation, indicating a high risk of viral spread. The predicted distribution of roosts further provides valuable inputs for landscape models of rabies transmission and management. More broadly, our statistical framework is applicable for modelling the density of partially observed colonial species. Understanding the distribution of bats will become more important as climate change and urbanization increase contacts between bats, domestic animals and humans.
The use of joint modelling to integrate different fishery surveys results in a better niche identification and better prediction mapsThe integration of different datasets is an attractive way to improve our understanding and prediction of species distributions. In fact, different surveys may sample a different section of a species' ecological niche, which makes data integration even more necessary. In this study, we used joint-likelihood models to better identify the ecological niche of common sole in western Iberian waters by combining data on two different fishery surveys. Each survey sampled using different gears and the distribution of the samples partialy overlapped each other. Joint modeling clearly produced better results, obteining better fitted effects and better distribution maps.
"Mixed" occupancy designs: when do single visits add information to multi-visit data?Occupancy models (OMs) have become popular for assessing species distributions while accounting for detection errors. Most OM applications conduct repeated visits to each site, but numerous surveys and biodiversity monitoring programs choose a more economic, mixed sampling design, where only a subset of sites is visited repeatedly, while the remainder are visited only once. It is not clear, however, whether these single-visit (SV) sites contribute information to occupancy, detection, both or none. To gauge the degree to which such additional data are useful to estimation, we conducted two simulation studies. In both simulation studies, we generated detection/non-detection data from M repeated-visit sites with J ≥ 2 visits and data from between 0 and 5000 additional SV sites, and varied occupancy (?) and detection (p) probabilities to emulate a wide range of biological and sampling conditions. The amount of information contributed by SV sites was inferred from a change in the precision of the estimates ??? and p?? as the number of SV sites was increased. In Simulation 1, we fitted intercept-only OMs to three schemes of repeated sampling: 2 visits to 150 sites, 2 visits to 300 sites, and 4 visits to 150 repeated-visit sites. In Simulation 2, we compared the intercept-only model to three models which had one continuous covariate in either occupancy or in detection, or in both, to investigate whether the presence of informative covariates could increase the information content of SV sites in estimation of an occupancy model. Ourresults indicate that SV sites do, under all conditions tested here, contribute information to the estimation of both ??? and p??  under a mixed design. Their relative contribution varies depending on the structure of the repeated-visit data and on occupancy and detection probabilities. More information still is provided by inclusion of suitable continuous covariates for occupancy and detection. Our results suggest that greater precision in parameter estimation can be gained by utilizing any available SV data in mixed-design occupancy models to make the best possible assessment of occupancy while correcting for imperfect detection.
Benefits and limitations of model-based data integration for the estimation of temporal trends in biodiversity and identification of trend driversCurrent biodiversity strategies and conservation policies set targets for halting biodiversity loss and supporting the recovery of wild populations. To track progress towards achieving these biodiversity conservation targets, structured monitoring programs were developed that provide solid evidence on population trends. However, due to the resources needed to coordinate and run such programs, they are usually restricted to few taxa and have a limited spatial and temporal coverage. These constraints restrict the ability of using data from such structured monitoring programs to precisely estimate trends for less common species and to analyze drivers of population change. In addition to these well-designed datasets, the availability of biodiversity data gathered by citizen scientists increased in the last decade. Model-based integration of those structured data from standardized monitoring programs and less structured data from citizen science platforms offers potential benefits both for assessing biodiversity trends as well as identifying trend drivers. In a real-life case study, we evaluated for 26 common farmland bird species in Germany, if and how data integration improves the estimation of temporal trends over the 15 years. We integrated five different data sources that varied with respect to the degree of standardization in field methods and sampling design, the level of observer skills, and inherent spatial bias. The results showed that integrated models estimated temporal trends with higher precision compared to models built on the structured data only and indicating that increased data quantity lowers the uncertainties around the estimated trends enabling earlier detection of decreasing of increasing trends. In this talk we will also present further ongoing analysis based on data simulation that will show the benefits and limitations of model-based data integration, particularly addressing issues related to (i) data quantity, (ii) data quality and(iii) gradient coverage. Together these results will pave the way towards the inclusion of model-based data integration approaches in biodiversity trend monitoring.
Mapping bioregions on the west coast of South Africa using epifaunal trawl survey dataEcosystem classification maps are important for understanding and managing the marine environment. In South Africa, the classification and mapping of marine ecosystems follows an expert-driven data-informed approach to classification, with many ecosystems still requiring in-situ validation from biological data. While expert input remains valuable, statistical approaches to classification have the additional benefit of being able to predict bioregions in biologically poorly sampled regions by relating them to more expansively collected and readily available environmental variables. This study aimed to classify and predict epifaunal bioregions for the west coast continental shelf of South Africa (Southern Benguela Shelf Ecoregion) using a statistical approach to classification. Previously collected data from three years (2017, 2019-2020) of DFFE demersal fisheries research trawl surveys were used in this study, owing to their wide spatial and good temporal coverage. Biological data consisted of epifaunal (benthic invertebrate) abundance and environmental data consisted of covariates (temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen and pressure) collected from the trawl net-mounted CTD, in addition to bathymetry and sediment data. Mixture-of-experts models, Regions of Common Profile (RCPs, Foster et al. 2013), were used to classify and predict the bioregions (regions with homogenous and distinct species profiles) using the ecomix R Package. An advantage of using a statistical approach to classification which performs both classification and modelling stages simultaneously is that uncertainty is generated throughout, allowing mapped outputs to be interpreted more easily and meaningfully. Applying a statistical approach to the classification of biological regions has the potential to contribute towards improving the automation of classification and mapping in the future.
Principal spatio-seasonal patterns of Octopus vulgaris in the Mauritanian waters from 1987 to 2017By means of appropriate factorization and dimension reduction, we demonstrate the usefulness of empirical orthogonal maps (EOM) to sketch spatio-seasonal patterns from large series of georeferenced scientific/monitoring surveys. This was applied on Octopus spatial distributions in the Mauritanian waters for the two annual spawning seasons over the last thirty years (1987-2017). It allowed reducing the two sets of thirty-four and twenty-seven surveys respectively down to very few informative and symptomatic maps whose dynamic was linked to abundance. Our study revealed that:For the hot season:One single principal map (the first EOM) explained nearly half (48%) of the overall variability of the initial data and was predominant all along the study period. Its amplitude was strongly correlated with the abundance of octopus during this season (correlation coefficient of 0.79 and p-value 7.4e-07). It is also the only one among the first five EOM, which explain 72% of the variability, to have a significant correlation with abundance.This suggested that, over the last thirty years, the biogeography of octopus during the hot season was stable and well represented by a single spatial pattern whose dominance explained biomass. The symptomatic pattern of the hot season consisted in a north-south decreasing gradient of concentration.For the cold season:The dominant spatial pattern was more composite as the first ten empirical orthogonal maps were needed to explain 67% of the initial variability (the first one alone explaining only 18%). Five of these ten EOMs were correlated with abundance and had strong spatial structures.These abundance-correlated EOMs allowed us to characterize the major spatio-temporal fluctuations and trends in abundance over the study period. An average spatial pattern of the cold season was therefore highlighted, as well as its average temporal evolution, exhibiting two rich zones with an increasing trend for the recent period after having decreased at the beginning of the period.One principal map (the ninth one) showed significant correlation with the upwelling index few months before and represented the spatial patters that was connected with this key environmental controlling factor.
Can we use catch declarations data to map fish spatial distribution?Integrating multiple data sources to build more informative maps of marine species distribution is a major challenge in fishery ecology. Classically, maps are derived from fish research surveys data. Those data benefit from a standardized sampling design and a controlled catchability, but usually occur once or twice a year and may sample a relatively small number of locations. Fishermen catch declarations can provide a valuable and intensive additional data source to inform fish spatial distribution. However, integrating those data to inform maps remains challenging. First, when at sea, fishermen are not fishing randomly but may preferentially sample areas of high biomass. This is commonly referred to as preferential sampling (PS) and can lead to biased spatial predictions if not accounted for in inference. Second, fishing operations are usually daily aggregated and reported at coarse administrative spatial units (0.5° latitude by 1° longitude rectangles). These declarations are then reallocated on the GPS locations that are classified as fishing in the vessel path. Such reallocation implies strong hypotheses that may artificially increase or transform the available information. Typically, the aggregated catches are commonly reallocated uniformly on GPS positions, which may drastically smooth the spatial signal and ultimately bias estimates and spatial predictions.We propose a spatial hierarchical framework integrating both data sources while allowing to assess and correct for the misleading effect of PS and reallocation. The model accounts for PS by explicitly modelling the link between the sampling process of commercial data and the species distribution. In addition, the observation process is modified to propose a model that is fed with commercial data at the scale of fishing declarations rather than the reallocated catch at the scale of GPS locations. We use simulations to demonstrate the superiority of the method to improve the accuracy of spatial predictions and to estimate unbiased species-habitat relationship.Finally, we applied the framework to three demersal species (hake, sole, and squids) in the Bay of Biscay with contrasted PS behaviors. The results support the main findings highlighted in the simulations and paves the way towards high resolution spatio-temporal distribution modelling of marine exploited species.
Spatially balanced sampling designs are always more precise than random designs for estimating the size of aggregated populationsPopulation size is a parameter crucially needed for both ecological research and conservation planning. As it is usually impossible to count every individual in a population, ecologists rely on sampling strategies to estimate it. The precision of the resulting population size estimates, i.e. the sampling variance, depends on how the individuals are spatially distributed over the study area, more precise estimates being obtained for populations with spatially homogeneous densities of individuals than for populations with heterogeneous densities. One of the main causes of such a spatial heterogeneity of density is the aggregation of individuals, which can result from limited dispersal capacity or from the patchiness of favourable habitat for example.The goal of our study was to determine the best sampling strategy for populations depending on their level of aggregation and to provide practical guidelines to define this design for a given population in the field. We combined simulations of virtual populations and fieldwork on herbaceous plant species to compare the precision of three sampling designs, i.e. simple random sampling (SRS), systematic sampling (SYS), and spatially balanced sampling (SBS), over wide gradients of densities, aggregations (from repulsion to strong aggregation) and sample sizes.For the virtual populations, SYS and SBS were always equally or more precise than SRS, with sampling variances lowered by 40% and 20% respectively. This result is explained by a unique property of both sampling methods, whereby the highest precision for a population is always obtained when the average distance between sampling units equals the diameter of the aggregates. We obtained similar results for the natural populations we studied, although SYS and SBS were even more precise than in our simulations, with sampling variance lowered by 75% (SYS) and 60% (SBS) compared to SRS. Aggregate diameters we measured in the field allowed us to identify efficient designs, but not the best possible designs for the studied populations, suggesting that other parameters influence the sampling variance in natural populations with more complex spatial structures than the one we simulated. Meanwhile, we recommend to roughly assess aggregate diameters in the field to build relevant sampling designs for aggregated populations.
Fitting dynamic occupancy models to very large occurrence data sets using hidden Markov modelsDynamic occupancy models are widely used for analysing occurrence data sets (Royle, J. A. and Dorazio, R. M., 2008, Hierarchical Modeling and Inference in Ecology). They are fitted using classical inference in computer packages such as unmarked (Fiske and Chandler, 2011, J. Statistical Software) and Rpresence (https://www.mbr-pwrc.usgs.gov/software/presence.html), and also using Bayesian inference – see for example Clarke and Altwegg, 2019, Ecology and Evolution. Most published applications do not have much more than a thousand sites, and typically far fewer than that. An exception is the Bayesian implementation of a random-walk model (Outhwaite et al, 2018, Ecological Indicators) implemented in Sparta (https://github.com/BiologicalRecordsCentre/sparta. In the United Kingdom, extensive occurrence data are available for many taxonomic groups, and the Biological Recording Centre (BRC) oversees more than 80 recording schemes (brc.ac.uk, Pocock et al., 2015, Biological Journal of the Linnean Society). Sparta has been used to analyse extensive BRC data on invertebrates, bryophytes and lichens (Outhwaite et al., 2019, Scientific Data; 2020, Nature Ecology & Evolution) and pollinators (Powney et al., 2021, Nature Communications). However model-fitting in these cases can be extremely slow, even with a super computer.We are motivated by the need to fit dynamic occupancy models efficiently to very large data sets, such as those arising from the UK Butterflies of the New Millenium (BNM) database. For example one might have records on some 50,000 sites over 20 years, and there are typically also 70%-80% missing values. In our experience, existing computer packages using classical inference struggle when modelling such data.We have analysed very large data sets using classical inference and linked hidden Markov models, combined with innovative parallel computing, an approach which is remarkably efficient. The methodology naturally allows inclusion of covariates, model comparisons, and evaluation of goodness-of-fit measures. We illustrate the method using simulation and data on butterfly species from the BNM database, and comparisons are made with unmarked and Rpresence. The ability to model large ecological data sets efficiently provides estimates of key demographic parameters describing survival and colonisation, to enhance understanding, potentially link with integrated population modelling, and ultimately inform and improve management and conservation.
Delivering policy-relevant indicators: South Africa's Data Pipeline for Wetlands and WaterbirdsExtracting relevant information for timely decision making out of increasing volumes of ecological data is becoming a challenge. A possible solution to facilitate the link between raw data and end users is to streamline data processing through data pipelines. South Africa's Data Pipeline for Wetlands and Waterbirds (BIRDIE) uses raw data submitted by citizen scientists, vets the data for internal consistency, statistically analyses the data, and finally, makes decision-relevant outputs available via an online dashboard, and via an API for system integration.With ever-increasing pressure on wetlands due to the scarcity of freshwater on Earth, there is an urgent need to monitor the status of these ecosystems. In this context, waterbirds often serve as flagship and indicator species for other less accessible taxa. In South Africa, there are two country-wide citizen-science projects that provide waterbird data: the Coordinated Waterbird Counts and the Southern African Bird Atlas Project. BIRDIE leverages these datasets, as well as other opportunistic records, to understand the distribution and population dynamics of waterbird species. Behind the scenes, these citizen-science data are analyzed using a suite of statistical techniques including state-space, and occupancy modelling, to estimate population dynamics and distributions.The project will contribute to the implementation of international programmes, such as the RAMSAR convention, the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds, and the Convention on Biological Diversity. At a national level, the outputs from BIRDIE will contribute to Red-Listing evaluations, National Biodiversity Assessments, as well as to support site management and decision making. Designing a data pipeline that fits more than two hundred species and runs automatically poses many challenges, but we show it is possible, and demonstrate the value it adds for decision makers.
Analysis of Presence-only data via Exact Bayes: the bayesPO package in RPresence-only data appears from opportunistic sampling of species. Its sighting locations are often recorded from citizen science programs or herbaria and do not follow a systematic or randomized design. If this sampling bias is not taken into account, occurrence estimation might be wrongfully skewed towards locations that are easily accessible to people.Although there are some available software tools aimed at presence-only data, it used to be hard to perform Bayesian analysis of such data. bayesPO is an R package and is available in CRAN. It implements the methodology from the recently accepted paper in the Annals of Applied Statistics to perform Bayesian analysis without the need for model approximation.Bayesian analysis implies full evalutation of the estimation uncertainty which can be summarized in credible intervals. Additionally, expert knowledge can be included in the model in the form of prior information.Popular forms of regularization and model selection will be available by the presentation date. The implemented methodology can provide parameter and model identification, even when a covariate is used to explain both intensity and observability.The talk will showcase the packages functionalities, potential and output. In particular, the basics of model estimation will be shown. Features analogous to the popular MaxEnt software will be presented, such as covariates importance and impact curves. The talk will close with a discussion on desired features.
Analysing the large-scale spatial synchrony of a boreal rodent population subject to high seasonalityNorthern ecosystems are subject to very strong seasonal differences with long winters and short summers. These striking differences in seasonality have large effects in the population dynamics of several species, contributing to density-dependent regulation and adding to the effect of environmental stochasticity.However, seasonality is too often disregarded in the study of large-scale population processes even though its importance is widely recognised. This is especially true in the case of spatial population synchrony – the correlation in population cycles of a species across space, for which stochasticity (the “Moran effect”) has been postulated to be an important driver.In this study, we single out the contribution of seasonal environmental stochasticity (i.e. seasonal Moran effect) to spatial population synchrony in a boreal rodent species, the Gray-sided-vole. Mark-recapture- based population time series were collected at 19 stations, across a transect of over 150 km in northern Norway, in both spring and fall, for 21 years. Specifically, we decompose the contribution of three important factors contributing to spatial population synchrony: (1) season- and (2) subregion-specific density dependence, and (3) season-specific weather stochasticity. We first de-trend the time series using autoregressive models, incorporating subregional and seasonal-varying density-dependence (direct and delayed). We then analyse the spatial correlation in the model residuals, separately for each season, to estimate the scale and shape of the spatial population synchrony. To investigate environmental drivers synchronising the populations, we then model the de-trended population synchrony as a function of the spatial correlation in relevant weather variables.Our results reveal marked differences in the scale and shape of synchrony during spring and fall, as well as the influence of winter weather conditions on population synchrony. Interestingly, winter weather appears to display a lagged effect on synchrony during the summer season – highlighting the importance of the changing winter in boreal ecosystems and, more generally, the importance of explicitly addressing seasonality in studies population synchrony.
A multi-state mark-recapture-recovery model to estimate rates of severe injury and cause-specific mortality in North Atlantic right whalesRecent decline of North Atlantic right whales over the past decade has been attributed to high rates of mortality and low rates of reproduction. The former has been driven by human-related causes including entanglement and vessel strike, though cause-specific mortality rates have been difficult to estimate due to uncertain variation in carcass detection and a large proportion (>60%) of cryptic mortality. Here we present a multi-state mark-recapture-recovery model that leverages the sightings of individuals with severe injuries and recovered carcasses of known individuals to estimate rates of injury and mortality during 1990–2019. Annual variation and decadal trends in injury and mortality rates were accommodated, as well as the effect of mature females recovering from the physiological stress of reproduction. Model results suggest that while just under half of vessel strike mortalities may result in recovery, entanglement mortalities are recovered at a much lower rate. Population-wide apportionment of mortality suggests a ~2:1 ratio of entanglement to vessel strike deaths. Females with a recently weaned calf had higher rates of severe injury and, consequently, a higher proportion of mortalities due to entanglement. By integrating observations of severe injuries with carcass recoveries, our modeling approach provides a novel framework for estimation of cause-specific mortality.
Inferring species interactions from multivariate presence-absence time- series data - should one explicitly account for the observation process?In community ecology research, determining and assessing the mechanisms that drive the communities to exhibit patterns in observed species communities has become increasingly interesting topic in addition to just describing the patterns in species communities. Driven by the need for robust analytical methods, Joint Species Distribution Modelling (JSDM) concept has been developed rapidly throughout the last decade.Although existing JSDM frameworks are already well capable, for example, to quantify species abiotic interaction and species-to-species associations, separating truly biotic interactions from joint response to unaccounted abiotic factors has been challenging. Nevertheless, biotic interactions may often be of the prime interest and they could potentially be more reliably inferred from time-series data, where the data on species communities is repeatedly collected from the same units, using first-order multivariate autoregressive (MAR(1)) models. Within this framework, the AR matrix determines how the values of the process at previous time point affect the next time point, and thus its values can be interpreted as species causal interactions. The MAR-models considered so far in the literature have provided only a limited treatment of observational noise in the statistical model. We aim to address this issue by combining a Gaussian-noise MAR(1) model for continuous state-space latent process dynamics to model the observation process with a suitable probability distribution for the data.We compare the proposed method to a direct MAR(1) model that uses the observed data at previous time point instead of values of a latent process to define the distribution in the next time point. We compare the two alternative models in terms of their predictive performance and potential ecological interpretation perspectives using both simulated data and a real time-series data on waterbirds presence-absences in a set of ponds.
Biotic interactions in breeding bird communities drive nonlinear responses to global changesEmpirical studies generally consider that global changes drive population dynamics through their direct effect on species distribution and demography. However, biotic interactions are also likely to shape large- scale species distributions and dynamics because variations in environmental conditions could indirectly influence population dynamics via their biotic interactions. Those Environment-Species Interactions (ESI) are defined as the biotic and abiotic effects of the environment that depend on population size, and are likely to drive non-linearities in species response to environmental variation. Understanding the emergence and drivers of these non-linear responses potential induced by ESI is important because they are likely to impair reliable predictions of species and community responses to global changes.GjamTime is a probabilistic, dynamic modelling framework for inference that explicitly incorporates abiotic and biotic processes by modeling the combined impacts of environment and species interactions from observational data. This framework based on a lotka volterra model can thus estimate ESI from observed data while including full uncertainty. We here used the GjamTime model with data from a high-resolution, standardized bird monitoring scheme (French Breeding Bird Survey, FBBS) to investigate the following questions :Whether and how much ESI influences bird population responses to climate and land-use-and-cover changes ?In which biogeographical context the effects of ESI are the most important in shaping bird population responses ?The influence of ESI was weak relative to the direct effect of climate and land use change on species distributions. However, they appear sufficient to induce nonlinear responses to global change. Our study pledges for the use of dynamics models allowing us to take into account species interaction in the understanding and prediction of populations' response to global changes.
What is that map for? Aiding the clear communication of uncertainty in species distribution maps by considering their usage in practice.Communicating uncertainty in maps of species distributions is a challenge for researchers. There are a rich variety of possible approaches, each of which require varying levels of statistical expertise in order to interpret outputs correctly. This is a particular concern when communicating to audiences with a range of statistical backgrounds.To aid researchers in making decisions about communicating uncertainty in species distribution maps, we suggest asking a clarifying question: What will the maps be used for? The answers to this question can illuminate potential issues and limitations with conventional outputs of species distribution models, and motivate novel ways to summarise outputs to address specific aims.We illustrate with a case study investigating the spatio-temporal distribution of an endangered tropical bird. Responses to our question include "Is the spatial distribution changing?", "Is there expansion to the north of the study region?", "Where are the hotspots?", "Are the hotspots diffusing/coalescing?", and "Are the hotpots moving?". We highlight problems with conventional model outputs for addressing these questions. Rather than leaving the crucial last step of interpretation to take place informally in the minds of the audience, we advocate operationalising each key question as a statistical problem and addressing it within a statistical framework. This directly links the uncertainty in species distribution estimates to the key take- away messages of the analysis. This approach requires modellers and domain experts to collaborately closely to ensure the statistical framework meets the objectives of the study as closely as possible.
Sensitivity analysis to interrogate the effects of parameter choice on species distribution modelling output uncertaintyNumerous studies have shown that species distribution model predictions vary extensively depending on a host of choices made during the model building process, from how background data are selected, to the choice of predictor variables, to the choice of model settings, among numerous others. This suggests that SDM practitioners need not only be completely transparent about the choices they have made during the model building and evaluation processes, but should also evaluate model outputs in relation to these choices. These choices are essentially parameter settings of the model and allow for formal sensitivity analyses to be conducted. Sensitivity analyses show which parameters have the strongest influence on model results, and can help researchers fine tune their models, as well as provide a clearer picture of uncertainty in the model results. While sensitivity analyses are extensively used in many other research fields, such as in hydrology, engineering and climatology, they are rarely used in species distribution modelling. We hope to address this shortcoming by providing a review of suitable methods for conducting sensitivity analyses for species distribution modelling.
Wrong but Useful? Identifiability Regimes of Species Distribution and Abundance Models Under Model Mis-specificationMany ecological questions require hard-won data, and resource constraints often push us to do more with less. There have been continued debates about which models can provide trustworthy information about species prevalence, occupancy, detection, and abundance, especially with the inevitability of model mis- specification. Competing findings about the identifiability of parameters of interest beg the question: why should we care if another ecologist’s model isn’t identifiable when ours is?We reconcile these competing identifiability results by bringing terminology from the econometrics literature about a hierarchy of identifiability to the ecology community. Different levels of identifiability exist depending on the parametric assumptions imposed on the model. The relevant, and strongest, form of identifiability, non-parametric identifiability, exists when a model could, in theory, be estimated without parametric assumptions like common link functions that are at the center of many of the debates in the current ecology literature.We also propose a way to investigate whether this stronger form of non-parametric identifiability holds in targeted parts of a species distribution or abundance model. We relax certain parametric assumptions, like the linearity of the mean response, approximate a non-parametric relationship with a flexible, unpenalized spline, and fit this to simulated data with increasing sample sizes to assess the potential to fit a non- parametric model. A successful approximation shows that the data is information rich enough to robustly inform quantities of interest.We find that when a property of interest lacks non-parametric identifiability, the “best approximating” model is not “close” to the truth in the way that we might expect, increasing the flexibility within a mis- specified parametric model does not get us closer to the truth, and mis-specification of the model for the distribution of both observable and unobservable quantities is not diagnosable.In this talk, I will argue that a useful approximation to the truth can only be found when the stronger non- parametric identifiability holds in key parts of the model. The consequence of continuing to rely on parametric assumptions is identifiability by fiat where the data cannot distinguish alternative models and inference about important ecological quantities is put into serious question.
Markov-switching step-selection functions for state-dependent habitat selectionA central interest in ecology lies on animals’ habitat and resource use. Combining movement and environmental data, step-selection functions (SSFs) form a popular framework for studying fine-scale habitat selection of animals, while also considering movement capacities when defining available habitat. However, animals usually switch between different behavioural modes, such as resting, foraging, and migration, which influence their preferences, selection, and movement patterns. Consequently, ignoring behavioural states in habitat selection analyses might lead to biased results and possibly erroneous conclusions. Since behavioural states are usually unobserved, it has recently been suggested to incorporate behavioural information inferred from hidden Markov models (HMMs) into habitat selection analyses. A naive approach is to first classify the data into different states using HMMs, interpreting the states as proxies for underlying behavioural modes, and then apply separate SSFs to each of these HMM states.However, this two-step approach ignores uncertainties in the state classification and might confound movement and selection patterns. In this talk, we propose the use of Markov-switching step-selection functions (MS-SSFs) which integrate both modelling approaches into a single model and allow to simultaneously estimate both - the underlying state dynamics and the corresponding movement and selection coefficients. We use a simulation study to showcase different scenarios in which MS-SSFs can be applied, and to compare the MS-SSF to the two-step approach. Furthermore, we illustrate the proposed method using real animal movement data from red deer (Cervus elaphus).
Spatially heterogeneous detection probability in spatial capture- recapture: consequences and solutionsSpatial capture-recapture (SCR) models can account for spatial heterogeneity in detection probability that are likely to occur due to various factors, such as animal movement, distance from activity centers, the underlying habitat, and characteristics of the sampling. These effects are routinely accommodated and studied in SCR analysis when the source of variation is known. However, the consequences of the misspecification of the detection process in the presence of unknown or partially known variable and spatially autocorrelated detection probability has not been systematically investigated. This is the case when, for example, covariates coding for variable effort and detection probability in general are incomplete or entirely lacking. Using simulations, first, we show that ignoring spatially autocorrelated and highly variable detection probability can seriously affect SCR estimates of population size in terms of bias, precision, and coverage probability of 95% confidence intervals. Second, we develop SCR models that specifically accommodate unknown and spatially autocorrelated heterogeneity in detection probability. We explore the efficacy of the models by comparing them with a basic single-session SCR model under both presence and absence of spatially autocorrelated detectability at different scales. We discuss the usefulness of our approaches to account for spatially autocorrelated detection probability in wildlife monitoring studies.
Dealing with unbalanced sampling through bivariate Bayesian regression models: maturity of European hake.The proportion of mature fish at age or length is one of the most important population attributes in assessing reproductive potential. This proportion is usually named the maturity ogive. For the European hake (Merluccius merluccius) in the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) divisions 8.c9.a a combined maturity ogive is required as data is provided by two countries, Portugal and Spain. Usually a weighted average between the maturity ogive indicators of the two countries is carried out to obtain a combined ogive, although issues arise due to the difficulty to decide weight values for each country. In addition, the unbalanced sampling between countries and the latitudinal length-at-maturity gradient must be taken into account during the modelling process to avoid misleading results. Within this context we propose a bivariate Bayesian regression model using the integrated nested Laplace approximation (INLA, Rue et al., 2009) approach in the R-INLA software (https://www.r-inla.org/). The bivariate model response considers separately two maturity variables (0/1, immature/mature) one for each country. The two response variables are explained using the total length of the fish (TL) and year as covariables. TL is included as a random walk of second order process (RW2) whereas the temporal effect is tested in different forms:(1) year level fixed factor, (2) an i.i.d. (independent and identically distributed) year random effect and (3) as year categories factor set up with a structural change analysis. Results of the different modeling options are proposed to be tested in the stock assessment model to analyze their performance as any variability or bias is reflected in the spawning stock biomass estimates and, therefore, in the management measures. The main advantage of the proposed approach is that the model carried out a combined estimation of all the parameters of the common predictor providing a combined ogive and taking into account all the issues mentioned before.
Developing a decision-analytic tool to mitigate wildlife-based conflictsDiffering perspectives among stakeholders generate conflicts about how to manage wildlife species and the habitats they depend on. Nature conservationists would like to maintain natural ecosystem processes and viability of native species at all trophic levels. At the same time, members of the hunting community are concerned about large carnivores depressing wild ungulate populations or making them more difficult to hunt, thus threatening their livelihoods. Browsing and bark-stripping by wild ungulates can affect forest growth and compromise protective functions of mountain forests. These effects may be exacerbated by the retreat of these herbivores from expanding populations of wolves in the Alps. Many landowners in this region are concerned about such impacts of wild ungulates on forests. District authorities responsible for managing these populations are therefore pulled in multiple directions by diverse stakeholders when striving for sustainable wildlife management. To our knowledge, there exists no modeling framework to inform these decisions. Despite the rapid expansion of decision analysis for natural resource management in North America, this approach is rarely applied in Europe and other continents. We use collaborative decision analysis to develop a model for informing resource allocations among management actions while accounting for conflicting views and uncertainty. Through stakeholder workshops in Lower Austria, we constructed a decision-support tool based on a Bayesian decision network. The tool is designed for application by non-technical users across diverse decision-making contexts with particular sets of game- management actions, objectives, and uncertainties. We asked game managers and other stakeholders whether the tool would be effective at addressing hurdles to decision-making through semi-structured interviews and surveys before and after the workshop series. Workshop participants were mostly optimistic about the potential for the tool, and we are now planning further improvements and tests of the tool in actual decision-making. This represents an important step toward developing and evaluating a transparent and replicable approach for mitigating wildlife-based conflicts.
rangr: An R package for simulating range dynamics of virtual speciesData originating from citizen science and wildlife monitoring programmes pose a great analytical challenge. They usually have complicated, multivariate and hierarchical structure which is a result of spatial and temporal replication, hundreds of recorded species and many observers involved. Despite a relatively low signal-to-noise ratio and considerable observational error, these kinds of data are an extremely useful, and sometimes the only, source of ecological information. Therefore, they are widely used in scientific research and conservation.In this study, we present rangr, an open-source R package designed to simulate species range dynamics. This tool mimics the essential processes that shape population numbers and spatial distributions: local dynamics, dispersal and habitat selection. Simulations may be conducted in a spatially-explicit and dynamic environment, which facilitates population projections as they respond to climate or land-use changes. By using different sampling schemes and observational error distributions, the structure of the original survey data can be reproduced or a purely random sampling can be mimicked.Some of the key features of rangr are its high flexibility and customisability, which guarantees that the simulation can be tailored to meet specific research needs. For instance, the user can choose between different types of dynamics (including Allee effects), modes of dispersal and dispersal kernels, detectability functions, or levels of stochasticity. To improve scalability, the R code is optimised to support parallelization and efficient memory management.
A unifying modelling framework for metabarcoding dataMetabarcoding has been a breakthrough in the field of wildlife population monitoring, because it allows detection of substantially more species per sample compared to traditional sampling methods. The data obtained from metabarcoding protocols are in the form of counts, with each count representing the number of times the DNA of a particular species has been detected in the sample. Modelling metabarcoding data presents additional challenges compared to traditional sampling methods. For example, in addition to false negative observation error, it is important to account for false positive observation error due to contamination at the site or at the lab and to distinguish at which stage the contamination has occurred. An additional challenge is that parameters at different levels of the sampling process are unidentifiable or very close to being unidentifiable. For example, it is usually impossible to distinguish whether a low count is the result of lower biomass or of low amplification rate in the lab. We propose a new modelling framework for studying species communities using metabarcoding data, while taking into account false positive and false negative error at each stage of the sampling process. Compared to previous modelling approaches, we are able to infer changes in species distribution using the information from the number of reads and from the occupancy process, while accounting for errors at each stage and for PCR-specific biases. We tackle the identifiability issue in two ways. We propose an efficient MCMC strategy based on interweaving strategies that allows optimal mixing and we account for spike-ins, which are artificial controls introduced during the bioinformatic process to improve estimates of noise in the process. Finally, we account for the effect of covariates at all stage, and for species correlations at the species distribution stage, incorporating a joint species distribution model approach. We apply our approach to ingested DNA, collected by analyzing leeches, and DNA collected through malaise traps.
Combining data from new and emerging data streams -- towards a general statistical modelling approachThis talk discusses statistical methodology that make optimal use of newly emerging and existing data streams by jointly modelling data acquired from several data sources. The approach operates across different spatial scales and resolutions by indexing the data in continuous space. Data collected at different spatial scales can be used within the same model through projecting it into continuous space and projecting it back into the spatial scale of interest.The approach uses hierarchical Bayesian statistical models that combine data from different sources at potentially different spatial scales through a joint modelling approach. The approach operates within the general and flexible spatial statistics modelling framework INLA that is computationally efficient and hence fitting complex spatial models becomes feasible within a realistic time frame. We consider multi-layer models with several responses and associated likelihoods for the different types of data linked through one or several terms shared between the levels. Computationally, the approach allows a flexible representation of spatial and spatio-temporal structures by employing a spatially continuous approximation through the stochastic partial differential equation (SPDE) approach. In addition, observation processes specific to particular study are accounted for through methodology developed for the software package inlabru.We will discuss the relevance of the methodology to a range of contexts by discussing applications to fisheries, epidemiological, land management and citizen science data.
Hierarchical OrdinationOrdination methods have been used by community ecologists to describe and explore the communities they sample by reducing this variation down to a small number of dimensions. More recently, Joint Species Distribution Models have been developed to model and predict the distributions of several species simultaneously. Contemporary models for the data for both of these problems are essentially the same: Generalised Linear Latent Variable Models (GLLVMs).We have been developing extensions to GLLVMs where we model the latent variables themselves. Here we propose hierarchical ordination: a unified approach to this, which incorporates several current models. The innovation is to model both the latent variables and species scores as functions of the environment and of species' traits. This has the potential to simplify the models, and still help to solve ecological problems such as the fourth corner problem, and having correlations between species depend on the environment.We will describe the hierarchical ordination framework, and show how these models can be used in practice.
Assessing precision and accuracy of hierarchical models for abundance estimation in camera trap studies through a simulation study of movement trajectories from focal and non-focal species.In many wildlife monitoring programmes the aim is to obtain animal densities from spatially referenced binary or count data. Since accurately estimating density often demands auxiliary data collection, inferring distributional patterns or abundance is favoured in many cases. Hence, the increasing popularity of hierarchical models (HMs) for abundance estimation. This demands for a better understanding of factors that determine the accuracy and precision of abundance obtained from HMs. Moreover, camera trapping networks are often designed for optimally detecting just one focal species. Hence, the question emerges whether such networks can also be used to make meaningful inference on abundance of non-focal (by- catch) species. In this presentation, I will focus on (i) a comparison of abundance estimates obtained through fitting a Royle-Nichols (RN) and N-mixture model (NMM) to data collected on a virtual focal species;(ii) the optimal study design with regard to this focal species; and (iii) the potential to also infer abundance of non-focal species using the study design optimized in (ii).To compare abundance estimates from RN and NMM, I generated count data by simulating virtual populations moving according to a group-specific activity-adjusted random walk and monitored through virtual observers (i.e. camera traps). Movement trajectories were simulated for three virtual species (one focal and two non-focal), whose movement characteristics were informed by real trajectories of Sus scrofa (wild boar), Capreolus capreolus (roe deer) and Vulpes vulpes (red fox). Next, I compared the abundance estimates, in terms of bias, root mean square error and coverage of 95% confidence intervals, from RN and NMM under the study design that is currently adopted in the Hoge Kempen National Park (Belgium). I then sought to optimize this design by adjusting the number of cameras deployed (25%, 50% or 100% of sites with a camera), its placement (stratified-random, lattice, lattice plus close pairs) and the sampling duration (5, 25 or 50 days). Finally, I evaluate the abundance estimates obtained for non-focal species using the optimized design.In summary, this work provides important insights in the impacts of (i) animal-specific characteristics and (ii) study design choices on the performance of HMs for abundance estimation.
Fit parents and fat chicks? Linking foraging and breeding success in Adélie penguinsGiven its ability to generate large datasets that are often plagued by issues such as auto-correlation and high observation error, movement ecology has provided a generous setting for applied statistics. This has created a huge suite of models in the field that can be applied to address investigations ranging from path reconstruction to the identification and description of different foraging behaviours. However, our understanding of what impact any differences in movement characteristics has upon individuals or groups is often based on correlation or is inferred based on previous research. What is largely lacking are movement models that mechanistically link animal movement to demographic outcomes such as breeding success and survival. We have been given a unique opportunity to design and implement such models using the Adélie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) as a model species. Adélies are one of the most widely spread and abundant penguin species in the world, with a circumpolar distribution. While clumsy on land, they are agile marine predators, with their diet primarily consisting of small fish and krill. Because of this strong reliance on the lower trophic levels and a well-documented relationship between the condition of the Antarctic pack-ice and their population viability, Adélie penguins are also considered an indicator species for the health of the Antarctic marine environment. Across two breeding seasons the at-sea locations (using GPS), foraging success, breeding success, and chick survival of 43 breeding Adélies from Cape Bird, in the Ross Sea, was collected. This presentation will discuss current work describing the at-sea foraging behaviour through established movement modelling, the modelling of survival and body-condition of chicks through the breeding season, and our attempt to unify these two models mechanistically through adult foraging success (or food load). This research is not only meaningful for the management of an important indicator species, but also may assist in the development of movement models that allow more robust inferences into what impact variations in movement behaviour has upon individuals and wider populations.
Integrated population models for focal wildlife species inform landscape- scale forest restorationHuman activity has disrupted the dynamics of environments across the globe, altering ecosystem function in the face of global change. In the USA, landscape-scale forest restoration efforts on public lands aim to create more resilient ecosystems by re-introducing processes (e.g., fire) altered by human activity. These programs track the outcomes of restoration using population trends of focal wildlife species that serve as one proxy for forest ecosystem recovery. However, landscape-scale restoration efforts are in their infancy, with many beginning in the last decade, and have just begun to generate enough data to address whether these efforts lead to restored ecosystem states. The data collected for these projects usually includes information on landscape conditions and on the populations of focal wildlife species, often birds. Combined, these data sources can tell a more complete picture of focal species’ trends than any single data source; thus, creating integrated population models (IPMs), informed by multiple habitat and wildlife data sources, may be key to more informed management decisions. In this project, we evaluate the efficacy of three landscape-scale restoration projects located in Oregon and Idaho, USA. We compiled 10 years of data from multiple sources (nest survival, productivity, habitat use, and adult occupancy) to understand the effects of forest restoration efforts (e.g., tree harvesting, prescribed burning) on a focal species, the white-headed woodpecker (Dryobates albolarvatus). Using a Bayesian framework, we fit an IPM to multiple habitat and bird population data sources generated under a Before-After-Control-Impact (BACI) monitoring framework. We find that restoration efforts have an impact on key demographic states, including egg and nestling survival, and that these impacts depend on restoration effort type (tree harvesting or burning). We use the results from this Bayesian IPM to examine the effects of landscape restoration efforts on population trends of the white-headed woodpecker. The outcome of this study provides evidence of the efficacy of the restoration efforts in question and identifies population parameter thresholds for management decisions.This study also provides a model for data analysis and integration for landscape-scale restoration efforts that rely on focal species to evaluate the effectiveness of forest restoration activities.
Variability issues in compositional regression models to understand the marine community dynamic of Abrolhos in Brazil. A hierarchical approach using Bayesian inference.In compositional regression it is important to detect which part of a whole presents high variability to help to understand some patterns about the complete process. This work proposes a procedure to characterize this peculiarity without giving up the data's natural restriction. A probabilistic Dirichlet regression model combining the usual compositional model with hierarchical structure was developed. The inference procedure was done under the Bayesian approach using the Hamiltonian Monte Carlo (HMC) method to obtain approximations to the posterior marginal distributions of interest. To avoid model identifiability issues, decision theory provides support in choosing one component as a reference. This model was motivated by the two ecological compositions in the Abrolhos Reefs of Brazil. The main results allow us to recognize patterns such as skewness, heteroscedasticity and atypical observations related to one specific component. Additionally, measuring the local effects on these compositions contribute to characterizing this marine community life.
The role of age-structured propagule pressure and human-mediated dispersal in determining plant invasion dynamicsBiological invasions play a major role in the current erosion of biodiversity and are costly for our societies. These problems are expected to grow in the coming years with the increasing accumulation of invasions around the world. Preventing invasions at minimal cost requires good timing, in particular for trees, whose exponential growth is often preceded by a lag phase, creating a crucial opportunity for management.However, the underlying mechanisms and duration of this lag phase are still poorly understood. We ask to what extent tree invasion lag phases are explained by age structured fecundity and human-mediated long distance dispersal. We propose a Bayesian hierarchical model that reconstructs mechanistically the spatial dynamics of trees based on their spatio-temporal occurrences. The proposed model accounts for known introduction locations and jointly estimates the environmental niche, the age structured fecundity curve and the effect of urbanization level on long distance dispersal rate by reconstructing age-structured populations across space and time. Capitalizing on past professional monitoring schemes and recent crowdsourcing data, we fit this model on past invasions over the last forty years in South Africa and Mediterranean Europe. We synthesize for each species the fecundity curve profile, and analyze the relationship between population age structure and global propagule pressure along with the contribution of urbanized areas as propagule sources for establishment in the wild.
Using movement models to define metapopulation patch structure based on interaction probabilitiesMetapopulation models assume that organisms live and interact within well-mixed patches. Interactions between individuals that affect demographic rates are assumed to only occur within patches, and populations in different patches are connected via dispersal. However, what constitutes a patch for a model of a given landscape is generally based on what researchers perceived as contiguous habitat regions in a landscape, rather than any formal measure of local interaction strength. This ignores the fact that animals moving through that landscape may not perceive patches in the same way as researchers. In the last decade, substantial strides have been made in developing statistical models of how animals choose to move across landscapes. However, these models have not been applied to the problem of how to segmentlandscapes into patches. In part, this is because quantifying what “well mixed” means when viewed through the lens of movement behaviour.We propose a new criterion to determine if two locations are part of the same patch: they are part of the same patch if there is a high probability of finding an individual in both locations, and if individuals starting from the two locations have a high probability of encountering one another in a demographically relevant period of time somewhere on the landscape; this interaction probability is the “kinetic distance” between the two points. This metric can account for complex movement patterns such as advection and boundary effects.We propose a new method based on this metric, “eigenpatch”, for clustering landscapes into patches based on random walk models of movement across the landscape. The eigenpatch method defines patches by translating a movement model of fine-scale rates of movements between locations on a landscape into a dispersal matrix, then using an eigen-decomposition of this matrix to calculate average occupancy rates and kinetic distances between locations, and applying clustering algorithms to the kinetic distance to group regions into patches. We test this method on a range of simulated landscapes and to a movement model of Northern Shrimp populations on the Labrador Shelf to demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach for quantifying metapopulation structure in complex landscapes.
Classifying California Horn Shark Behavior Using Semi-Supervised Hidden Markov ModelsData on the movement and body position of California horn sharks was collected through the use of accelerometers in both a lab setting and in Santa Catalina Island, California, USA. Accelerometer data from horn sharks in a lab environment can be partially labelled using video timestamps as corresponding to a type of behavior such as resting, swimming, or feeding. As such, we are then able to develop models to classify horn shark behaviors from accelerometer data in a semi-supervised manner where we leverage the labelled data to produce better classifications. The models can then be applied to classify the behaviors of horn sharks from accelerometer data gathered in the field, which is helpful as it is difficult to monitor the sharks in nature.We focus on development of semi-supervised hidden Markov models (HMMs) as they assume that the movement data is a result of the horn shark exhibiting one of several behavioral states, and allow for integration of partially labelled data. For the response variables, different combinations of static and dynamic acceleration data are used and modeled with a first-order autoregressive structure. The model’s parameters are estimated using maximum likelihood estimation. We use both the Viterbi and forward- backward algorithm for state-decoding to find the optimal sequence of behaviors predicted by the model, which is compared to the actual behavior labels to estimate the accuracy of the semi-supervised HMM. Along with the semi-supervised HMM, we also explore a fully unsupervised setting for behavioral classification of horn shark behavior.
Variance partitioning for integrated population modelsIntegrated population models (IPM) provide a framework for studying population dynamics by combining multiple data sources. IPMs can be used to investigate relations between temporal variation in environmental variables and variation in growth rates, mediated via demographic rates. Such investigations have usually come down to estimating covariate coefficients for the effects of environmental variables on demographic rates. However, a large coefficient does not necessarily imply a large impact on the growth rate if the sensitivity of the vital rate is low, and there have been few assessments of how environmental variation translates into variation in growth rates. Here we extend the transient life table response experiments (LTRE) of Koons et al. 2016, which partitions variation in realized annual growth rates into contributions from vital rates, to further partition the variation into contributions from temporally varying explanatory variables affecting the vital rates. The LTRE decomposition allows us to compare the resultant effect on the growth rate of different environmental covariates that may each act via multiple vital rates, and to compute the amount of variation in the growth rate that they explain. The approach is illustrated by an application to data from a 26 year study on wheatears, a migratory passerine bird breeding in an agricultural landscape. For this population we partition variation in realized growth rates into contributions from temperature, rainfall and population density in the breeding area, and rainfall in the wintering area.
Integrated species distribution modelling with citizen science dataSpecies distribution models are valuable tools for studying and mapping species distributions. These models also have the potential to be valuable tools in the investigation of seasonal and climatic changes in species distributions. However, to effectively investigate seasonal and climatic changes large amounts of data covering vast periods of time and space are needed but such data do not exist. A possible remedy is to combine various ecological data sets in a task called integrated species distribution modelling. Integrated Species Distribution Models (IDMs) typically combine structured survey data with unstructured opportunistic data such as that obtained via citizen science. Citizen science data sets however typically contain sampling bias. Not accounting for this bias can lead to models that perform markedly worse than models built on a single data set. In this presentation we discuss the development of an integrated modelling strategy that allows for effective handling of sampling bias in citizen science data.

Quantifying individual variation, selection, and additive genetic variance in migration versus residence with full-annual-cycle capture-recapture modelsSeasonal migration is a key trait that underpins spatio-seasonal population dynamics and allows individuals to escape from temporarily hostile environments. Global changes are altering patterns of spatio-seasonal environmental variability, including increasing frequencies of extreme climatic events (‘ECEs’). Yet, the potential for changing migration to mediate rapid eco-evolutionary responses remains largely unknown. In “partially migratory” populations, different individuals may undertake different tactics, such that they are resident or migrant throughout the non-breeding season, or express a mix of both phenotypes given late migration and/or early return to residence. Further, individuals may repeat or change their tactic across years. Phenotypes expressed within years and resulting annual tactics may be subject to survival and reproductive selection, and eco-evolutionary consequences will depend on the magnitude and form of phenotypic plasticity and additive genetic (co)variances. Quantifying all these components of variation in migration versus residence can be achieved using multi- year year-round resightings of marked individuals within partially migratory populations. Such data require advanced capture-recapture models to allow inference on parameters underlying phenotypic dynamics while accounting for spatio-temporal heterogeneity in re-encounter probabilities. Accordingly, we devised a suite of novel discrete-time full-annual-cycle models. Depending on the target parameters, we represented phenotypic variation as resulting from either a simple first-order Markovian multistate process, a dynamic finite mixture of annual tactics, or threshold-trait expression underlaid by continuous variation in latent individual liability. We fitted these models to large-scale ring-resighting, breeding success and pedigree data from adult European shags (Gulosus aristotelis) monitored over 12 years encompassing three winters with ECEs. We show patterns of substantial individually varying within- and between-year plasticity in migration versus residence. Yet, we found high phenotypic repeatability dominated by permanent environmental effects but also due to non-negligible additive genetic variation. Further, we demonstrate strong fluctuating selection  caused by episodes of opposing survival and reproductive selection. Residents typically had higher fitness than migrants due to higher breeding success, but they had lower fitness in ECE years due to lower survival. ECEs also caused large year- and sex-specific variation in selection on within-year plasticity. Overall, our results highlight the potential for seasonal migration to shape complex eco-evolutionary dynamics.

New Approaches to Estimating Population Size for Marine SpeciesA major component of fisheries science is stock assessment, the process of collecting and analyzing data to determine changes in the abundance of fishery stocks and predict future trends. Here I discuss new approaches we are developing to address this challenge.We introduce a new R package staRVe for analyzing spatio-temporal point-referenced data in a hierarchical generalized linear mixed model framework. It is designed to be easy-to-use and computationally efficient for inference and prediction. staRVe was motivated by the need to extract as much information on abundance as possible from fisheries research vessel survey data.Approach to EstimatingBy taking advantage of modern genetics, a new way to estimate abundance, the close-kin mark-recapture (CKMR) method, has recently been proposed. It only requires small pieces of tissue, taken from either live or dead animals, and generalizes the standard mark-recapture (MR) approach to use the resulting DNA marks to obtain information about relatedness among individuals in the sample. Here we demonstrate the potential for CKMR to estimate other key population parameters.
The fourth dimension in animal movement – the effect of temporal resolution in habitat selection analysesUnderstanding habitat selection of animals is important in ecology and conservation, allowing us, for example, to predict space-use of animals, to evaluate reasons for human-wildlife conflicts, and to design appropriate conservation measures such as movement corridors. Common statistical tools for assessing habitat selection are resource selection analysis (RSA) and step selection analysis (SSA). Typically, these approaches use animal location data from tracking systems that rely on animal-borne devices acting as signal transmitters or receivers. The weight limits of such devices according to species’ body mass also limit battery power. Therefore, sampling schemes often balance temporal resolution and total deployment time on a case-by-case basis, leading to highly variable temporal resolutions of data sets across studies. However, theoretical considerations of discrete-time movement models (random walks) indicate that these are sensitive to changes in temporal resolution, potentially leading to varying results (and subsequent interpretation) of analyses solely based on the data’s sampling rate. As the backbone of SSA is a random- walk model, it is thus important to understand the extent of this sensitivity in real settings. Here, we present a study where we evaluated the sensitivity of SSA to temporal resolution of movement data, comparing it to RSA. We applied classical RSA and SSA with case-control design, as well as a likelihood-based fit of the full movement model underlying SSA, and tested all models with both simulated and empirical data with different temporal resolutions. As expected, we found that overall SSA is more sensitive to temporal resolution than RSA. However, surprisingly, the sensitivity was much stronger for categorical than continuous-valued environmental variables. In contrast, RSA appeared more sensitive to the domain of availability for sampled control locations and more so for the continuous-valued variables. Our results show that SSA and RSA differ remarkably in their sensitivity to model assumptions, and that both methods should be applied with caution. We also demonstrate how this sensitivity scales up to predictive space-use maps derived from the SSA/RSA results, which are typical tools for conservation decision making.
Home range and core area analysis of Temminck’s Pangolin to inform reintroduction sites for trafficked animalsPangolins are the most trafficked mammal taxon worldwide and African pangolin species have been increasingly targeted. Their scales, like rhino horn, are comprised of keratin and increasingly used in traditional medicine and they are viewed as a culinary delicacy in China and Vietnam. This is in addition to threats such as climate change, electrified fencing and bush clearing. To date there have been few studies on these nocturnal and elusive species making conservation and in-situ re-introduction of confiscated trafficked live pangolins very difficult. Here we focus on home range (HR) and core area (CA) analysis of Temminck’s pangolin (Smutsia temminkckii) in a fenced private nature reserve in Namibia, which is part of a larger project studying their basic ecology. Fourteen individuals were GPS/UHF tagged and returned hourly location data from July 2019 to April 2020. The CReSS-SALSA (Complex Region Spatial Smoother with Spatially Adaptive Local Smoothing Algorithm) method was chosen for the HR and CA estimation as it can respect the shape of the reserve and the internal fenced lodge area and allow for the correlated nature of the observed locations. We found no significant difference between HA or CA sizes in the growing vs non- growing season, however there was much greater variability in the growing season. We found that there were significant differences between male and female HR and CA sizes in the growing season (10 females, 4 males). Male HR’s and CA’s were estimated to be significantly larger than females. Little is known to what extent pangolin share space however the HR and CA estimation for these individuals can be used to assess spatial overlap. In both growing and non-growing seasons we found that male HRs overlap with multiple female HRs suggesting a polygamous mating system and, interestingly, during the growing season there were no female-female HR or CA overlaps. The results inform reintroduction sites for trafficked pangolins into suitable habitat, especially decisions about multiple releases on the same site. The next steps are to identify commonalities in space use such as burrow or prey density, in different types of habitat and more than one season.
Spatio-temporal ecosystem drivers of Eastern Scotian Shelf shrimp (Pandalus borealis)The distribution of the eastern Scotian Shelf (ESS) stock of Northern Shrimp (Pandalus borealis) located in Atlantic Canada vary spatially and temporally in response to suitable habitat. Given that the shrimp from this stock inhabit very small swathes of suitable habitat along the ESS, this population is vulnerable to local overfishing and changing environmental conditions. Surplus production models estimate changes in exploitable portions of available stock biomass; however, explicitly incorporating spatio-temporal processes and appropriately describing variability is key to fish population science and stock assessments. To predict biomass as a function of spatially varying ecosystem variables, we applied a spatially explicit lag-1 autoregressive surplus production model to the ESS stock of Northern Shrimp. We demonstrate the application of Hierarchical Generalized Additive Models (Wood 2017; Pedersen et al. 2019) to model the spatial variance of shrimp productivity as a function of ecosystem predictor variables such as predation intensity. We further demonstrate the use of Markov Random Fields to model spatially structured variation in demographic parameters such as intrinsic growth rates.
Leveraging multiple hierarchical models to assess critical oceanographic drivers of forage fish distribution and availability in the Northeast US Continental Shelf ecosystemSmall pelagic forage fish are a critical prey resource within marine food webs, linking primary production and zooplankton to upper trophic level predators, such as seabirds, seals, and cetaceans. Forage fish surface aggregations represent a concentrated source of available prey for surface- and shallow-foraging marine predators, and are often patchily distributed within their broader species distributions. In some cases, we know which environmental factors affect the distributions of individual forage fish species, but inferences from broad-scale single species models may not be well-correlated with marine predator foraging behavior. Further, we lack an understanding of which features drive forage fish community distribution and aggregating behavior at the scale where many marine predators interact with their prey. We used a series of hierarchical models in a Bayesian framework to examine the roles of a common suite of oceanographic variables in driving distributions and aggregations of forage fish. Specifically, we applied a joint species distribution model to estimate the probability of occurrence of the forage fish community from bottom trawl survey data collected biannually across the U.S. Northeast Continental Shelf (NES) ecosystem. Then, we developed a spatial conditional autoregressive model to both jointly and independently assess the importance of oceanographic variables on forage fish aggregation abundance and size from digital aerial survey data collected at two survey sites within the NES ecosystem. The independent model proved to be the most appropriate for these data as responses of aggregation density and size to environmental covariates were not always aligned. Our results suggest that drivers of distributions vary by species, but depth, sea surface temperature, and sub-mesoscale eddies are consistently important factors. Although these variables influence the abundance and size of aggregations, salinity and mixed layer depth are also significant factors for the occurrence of aggregations. In combination, these models help us determine the availability of forage fish to marine predators at relevant scales. Additionally, this project is a step forward in understanding how to analyze digital aerial surveys of subsurface biota like forage fish and represents a novel application for spatial models.
Learning from the ups and downs of a multimodal hidden Markov model likelihoodHidden Markov models (HMMs) are ubiquitous in the analysis of ecological time series data. In the application of HMMs to animal movement data, it is assumed that the observed movements are a result of the animal’s underlying behavioral state. For example, modeling of overall dynamic body acceleration in sharks via HMMs can provide insights into activity states (low vs high activity) and GPS data can provide insights into behavioral states such as traveling, area-restricted search and resting behaviors in terrestrial animals. However, one of the challenges when fitting HMMs to data is that the likelihood surface, and subsequently joint posterior distribution, is multimodal. This aspect of model fitting is typically taken as a computational challenge. Multiple starting points are selected and convergence to local modes areexpected. Once it is expected that all of the possible modes have been found, a selection of the ‘global mode’ with the highest value of the likelihood is taken to represent the most likely possible values of our parameters and construction of confidence/credible intervals (CIs) is done around this mode only. All other modes are disregarded in the final presentation of the HMM results. However, a multimodal surface is not only a computational challenge, but should also be seen as an inferential and ecological challenge as well. Construction of CIs that disregard all but one mode have lower coverage and are not theoretically guaranteed to converge to the true value of the parameters. From an ecological standpoint, the parameter values that correspond to the ‘less likely’ modes may contain important ecological information. For example, the multiple modes may provide evidence that there is uncaptured individual variation in the model construction or point to other degrees of model misspecification. As difficult as it is to collect ecological time series data, we do a disservice by ignoring the modes of an HMM likelihood when we can learn so much more. It’s simply time to start learning from and embracing the ups and downs of a multimodal hidden Markov model likelihood.
Mapping malaria vectors to inform malaria control in Limpopo, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa using climate driven modelsSouth Africa was targeted for malaria elimination by 2020. To eliminate malaria, understanding of the overlap between areas suitable for malaria and the distribution of competent vectors is crucial.Studies have looked at the potential current distribution of malaria vectors across Africa but our understanding of how this may change under future climate scenarios is still limited. Studies looking specifically at South Africa are also lacking. We aimed to develop a more detailed understanding of the drivers that influence malaria vector occurrence and how their distributions may change as the climate changes in Limpopo, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa.We have collated records of species occurrences in Africa from 1990-2020 for five vector species. Eleven abiotic variables were sourced from WorldClim and Chen et al. (2020). To project suitability for vectors in the future we used climate projections utilising the SSP245 and SPP370 scenarios. For future land use projections, we used predictions utilising the SSP245 and SSP360 scenarios. Malaria vector occurrence data was used to train species distribution models, using presence-only modeling techniques and an ensemble modelling approach using five pseudo-absence techniques. Models were evaluated using a range of metrics to select the best model according to its predictive performance.For An. gambiae and An. funestus models, annual precipitation was the most important variable explaining 54-64% of the variance. For An. arabeinsis annual precipitation was the most important variable explaining 49% of the variance and percentage cover of broadleaf evergreen trees was the second most important variable explaining 15% of the variance. We also find that areas of high suitability predicted in our model do tend to fall within expert elicited ranges of each species from previous studies. Future projections of suitability in the three focal provinces highlight an increase in suitable sites for all three vector species.Our models predict increased suitability for multiple malaria vector species in Limpopo, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal in South Africa under future land use and climate scenarios, highlighting a potential increase in malaria burden in these areas.
Locating and tracking large insects using radio telemetryOptions for radio-tracking insects are limited. Large insects like the Monarch butterfly weigh ca. 0.5gm and can carry transmitters weighing up to 0.3gm without effects on flight behaviour. Such lightweight transmitters are commercially available but have simple low power signals. This is quite different from the multiple technologies available to track medium- and large-sized animals. We found that traditional location-finding methods, e.g., triangulation using bearings with the strongest received signal, do not work with lightweight transmitters.We deployed an automated radio telemetry system that records received signal strength (RSS) from each of 16 antennae placed on four towers at the corners of the study area. The goal is to locate and track monarch butterflies carrying 0.3gm transmitters in a field approximately 350m x 350m.Certain features of this system complicate estimating the transmitter location: measurements from the same location have large variance, measurements are not synchronous, measurements below a lower threshold are not recorded, and antennae sample different parts of the study area.We develop models that relate RSS to the distance and angle between the signal source and the antenna. These models include physically-based relationships between RSS and distance, empirical approximations for the relationships between RSS and angle, left truncation of RSS at the lower recording limit, and random effects to account for variability between antennae sampling different parts of the field. These models were fit to calibration data from known locations, then used to estimate unknown locations of stationary transmitters and tracks of moving transmitters.Locations of stationary transmitters are estimated by inverse prediction from a fitted RSS model. Moving animals were tracked using a continuous time Hidden Markov Model fit to a time series of RSS. Location accuracy varied between 10m to 18m in the center of the field (usable data from 4 towers) and 15m to 22m near one of the towers (usable data from 2-3 towers). Confidence regions, estimated from sums-of- squares contours or Bayesian credible intervals, are far from bivariate normal.
Spatial transfer of Habitat Suitability Models to inform data-poor regions: a case-study of the deep-water coral species Desmophylum pertusumInternationally there is political momentum to ensure the conservation, or special management consideration, of species and/or habitats of perceived ecological importance, vulnerability, or rarity. Desmophyllum pertusum is a globally distributed cold-water coral species that has high conservation importance due to its reef-forming capacity, longevity, and high vulnerability to demersal fishing impacts. Current knowledge on the distribution of this species within South African waters is extremely limited due to sampling and taxonomic limitations. In the well-studied North Atlantic, predictive models of species distribution and habitat suitability have been used to fill data gaps. Lack of baseline data in the South Atlantic has hampered local predictive modelling efforts for the deep-sea environment. This study aimed to apply a modelling-based approach to predict suitable habitat for D. pertusum in the data-poor Cape Canyon area. Using a model transfer approach, this study applied a model constructed in the data-rich North Atlantic to identify suitability habitat for D. pertusum in the Cape Canyon area off the west coast of South Africa. This technique assumes that a given species has a non-random distribution within a particular environmental envelope and that the majority of individuals would occupy the optimal range. The transferred model was built using the Maximum Entropy(MaxEnt) algorithm and constructed with 227 presence and 3064 pseudo-absence points, and 200m resolution environmental grids, including bottom temperature and derived layers of the fine-scale bathymetric position index, curvature, and terrain ruggedness. The model for D. pertusum fitted to North Atlantic data transferred well to the study area with an area under the curve(AUC) of 0,882. Maps resulting from this model indicated that suitable habitat for D. pertusum is distributed around the head of the Cape Canyon. Predicted potential distribution D. pertusumcan guide future field expeditions to verify the distribution of one of South Africa’s most sensitive, but poorly mapped, coral species. This study demonstrates the usefulness of model transfer approaches to augment mapping of marine species of conservation importance in data-poor regions. This work will advance mapping of South African marine environment and can be applied to support marine spatial planning efforts and marine protected area design.
Estimating Population Change with Citizen Science Data and Causal Machine LearningCitizen and community-science (CS) projects have unrealized potential to provide population monitoring across broad spatial extents, given the large volumes of high-resolution data collected globally every year. Yet, the flexible protocols that enable many CS projects to collect large volumes of data often lack the structure necessary to control for confounding sources of interannual variation when individual participants decide when, where, and how to conduct their surveys. Here we discuss how causal machine learning models can be used to estimate spatially-explicit population trends using semi-structured CS data. These models use a two-stage regression to account for selection bias and interannual confounding while estimating population change. Machine Learning is used to fit each regression, making it possible to exploit large sets of informative covariates to estimate complex patterns of population change in the face of complex selection biases.To demonstrate this approach, we estimated interannual trends from 2007-2019 for 451 breeding bird species in North America using species data from the CS project eBird with environmental data derived from remote sensing. We estimated population trends and associated uncertainty within each 27km ? 27km grid cell across each species’ range. We demonstrate the reliability of these methods with species-specific simulations and comparisons with independently derived estimates from the North American Breeding Bird Survey. These high-resolution trends provide a novel, valuable source of ecological information to help understand causes of bird declines and plan conservation actions. These results add to a growing literature demonstrating how to unlock ecological information from citizen science data.
zoid: A mixture model for analyzing proportional data with zeros, ones, and overdispersionMany ecological datasets are proportional, representing mixtures of constituent elements such as species, habitat types, or strains. Analyses of proportional data are challenged by categories withzero observations (zeros), cases where all observations fall into a single category (ones), and overdispersion. Conventional approaches to handling these challenges include aggregating data, removing observations, or manually adjusting values. An increasingly common approach avoids such ad-hoc adjustments by treating observations as arising from a mixture of statistical distributions. We describe and evaluate a mixture model (zoid) capable of handling observed data consisting of three possible categories: zeros, proportions, or ones. Instead of fitting data from single observational units (e.g., an individual organism), the model uses summed proportional contributions across units to estimate mixture proportions. Data arising as zeros or ones are modeled with binomial distributions and proportional observations are modeled using generalized beta distributions. Optional estimation of overdispersion and covariate influences expand model applications.We evaluate model performance, as implemented in Stan, using simulations and two ecological case studies. We show that zoid successfully estimates mixture proportions using simulated data with varying sample sizes and is robust to overdispersion and covariate structure. In the first case study, we model genetic information to estimate composition of a mixed-stock salmon fishery. In the second, we analyze stomach contents of Atlantic cod to illustrate how the model accommodates covariates and overdispersion. The zoid model represents a flexible tool for modeling proportional data in which zeros, ones, or overdispersion are expected a priori. Our implementation of the model as an R package, with corresponding descriptions, data examples, and user-specified model parameters, should facilitate its application to varied ecological datasets composed of proportional observations.
Assessing beaked whale behavioral response to naval sonar using a hierarchical hidden Markov modelRecent advancements in biologging technology (SMRT and Lander II tags) have made it possible to record marine mammal posture, movement, and depth at sub-second resolution over periods of days to weeks, often in conjunction with surface geolocations and acoustic recordings. The resulting large, complex datasets promise rich insights into whale behavior and behavioral responses to acoustic disturbance, but also present new challenges in data processing and statistical analysis. First, development of standard tools to calibrate, process, archive, and document data from the new tags was necessary. Analysis then required integration of information at vastly different time-scales: for example, animal surface positions were collected no more than once per 10 minutes, while accelerometer data was sampled at up to 200 Hz.Biology also dictates characterization of behavioral responses at both fine and coarse temporal resolution, since some key metrics are best observed at high temporal resolution (e.g., fluke-stroke rate, specific acceleration), others much lower (e.g., inter-foraging bout interval, dive duration), and a few at both scales (step length, turning angle). To glean information from many varying-resolution data-streams and assess behavior at both time-scales within a single framework, we formulated a hierarchical hidden Markov model (HHMM) to model beaked whale behavioral responses to sonar simultaneously at coarse (foraging-dive- cycle) and fine (5-minute-interval) time scales. In the model, acoustic exposure covariates modulateprobability of transition into a “response” state at the coarse scale, with distinct state-dependent distributions during response. At the fine scale, baseline and response states share the same state- dependent distributions, but rates of transition between states can vary. Preliminary results from the HHMM fitted to 10 tags deployed on Cuvier’s beaked whales (Ziphius cavirostris) identify behavioral responses to sonar including longer inter-foraging dive intervals, shorter bouts of echolocation at the coarse time-scale, and greater occupancy of the highest- and lowest-activity non-foraging states at the fine time- scale. Response probability was dependent on received sound level, but modulated by source-whale distance or sonar source type. Areas of ongoing work include incorporation of individual differences in responsiveness and a Bayesian formulation to better incorporate measurement uncertainty.
Integrated modeling of condition and sexual maturity of witch flounder in Atlantic CanadaChanges in the environment or population dynamics can often be reflected in the variability of life-history traits such as fish condition, mortality, growth, or sexual maturity. Reliable estimation of the spatiotemporal variation in these traits is important to understand population dynamics and provide better information for assessment and management, such as biomass or spawning stock biomass. Despite its importance, the variability in life-history traits is often overlooked. We used generalized mixed models with temporal (AR1) and spatial (Gaussian Markov Random Fields) correlation to estimate length-weight relationships, condition, and sexual maturity of witch flounder in the Newfoundland shelf in the Atlantic of Canada. We tested several specifications of the models, with or without the temporal, spatial, or spatiotemporal structure, and selected the best model based on AIC and BIC. We found significant spatiotemporal variation in these traits. We integrated the estimation and described the relationship between fish condition and sexual maturity.We then used cluster analysis to identify common trends in the spatiotemporal variability of the traits, and we found areas where the variation is similar. Traditionally, the witch flounder in in the Newfoundland shelf is managed as if condition and maturity are constant and homogeneous in the whole region. Our results highlight the importance of considering the spatiotemporal variation of condition and maturity to obtain a more accurate and realistic biomass estimation. We also discuss the mechanism that drives maturity changes based on the condition of the fish. Our estimates of life-history traits are precise and will contribute to the further development of improved biomass indices. This will benefit our understanding of the status of the population.
Validation of parameter estimates from camera trap photo-captures using calibration modelsCamera traps are a well-established sampling tool to monitor wildlife over large areas. Several new approaches to estimate density of unmarked species using camera-traps require precise measurements of the distance of the animal from camera-trap units. This study presents a new method to estimate the angular and radial distances of animals from digitized pixel positions within the image. Given the complexity of camera trapping fieldwork in difficult terrain, we attempted to limit the technology required to construct pixel-to-ground-distance models (‘calibration’) to allow its application in a wide range of settings. We used two levels of calibration: (1) camera calibration, with poles of known height and distances away from the camera units, to establish a basic relationship between pixel length and ground distances; (2) site calibration to estimate sitewise distance and angle on a range of ground surfaces. We validated the accuracy of these calibration equations using two approaches. Firstly, we generated ground locations by extrapolating calibration poles placed at known distances away from the camera. Secondly, to approximate field conditions, we marked a random selection of points on the ground and measured ground distances to them on a range of surface types. Finally, we used simulations to understand how the deviation in model estimated distance can bias estimates of speed and density. The predictive accuracy of first approach was higher (R? = 0.99), whereas for field validation approach, the accuracy decreased to (R? = 0.96). There was a consistent overestimation between distance generated using the calibration model and distance calculated from field. Based on the difference between field and digital calibration, we infer that the deviation is caused primarily by errors in image digitization by users, and in the ground surface model. We believe the theoretical pixel-to-ground-distance models to be fairly accurate and robust. Simulations suggested that the error in ground distances is not amplified in either effective radius or speed estimates, rather passing through with the same absolute value. With the positive bias in radius and speed estimates, density estimates were negatively biased. We suggest more precise image digitization of animal locations to increase the accuracy of density estimates.
Exploring patterns of responsiveness to sonar exposure: a Bayesian approach applied to multiple cetacean speciesEvaluating the impacts of anthropogenic underwater noise on cetacean populations has become a key requirement of contemporary environmental management across the world’s oceans. Of particular interest is the ability to predict the nature, onset, and magnitude of species’ responses to impulsive sound stimuli, such as those produced by naval sonar systems. Current noise exposure criteria for risk assessments are often based on classifications of species into functional hearing groups, yet increasing evidence for suites of complex responses that are both context-dependent and individually variable challenge the idea that sonar effects are universally mediated by species morphology and hearing sensitivity. We summarise the development and application of an alternative, data-driven approach for investigating mechanisms influencing behavioural responses within a Bayesian multi-species hierarchical dose-response framework. Our method relies on a “dimension-jumping” reversible-jump Markov chain Monte Carlo (rjMCMC) algorithm, and offers an objective, tractable, and computationally efficient way of identifying other biologically-relevant species groupings by assessing competing hypotheses regarding shared patterns of responsiveness to sonar and sonar-like signals. The method also accommodates: (1) the selection of explanatory covariates (e.g., sonar frequency, previous history of exposure, feeding behaviour, source- whale range), (2) the comparison of dose-response functional forms (i.e., monophasic or biphasic), and (3) the appropriate treatment of right-censored observations (i.e., when animals display no signs of behavioural response across the array of doses received). We demonstrate its potential using an existing dataset on the expert-scored response thresholds of thirteen cetacean species tagged during behavioural response studies conducted in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Our results provide novel insights into how responsiveness to sound can be generalised within and across species to inform impact assessment processes.
Ship strikes in the north-east Atlantic: identifying hotspots and simulating mitigation measuresLarge whales are likely the marine megafauna most at risk from vessel collisions; however, studies often identify areas of greatest risk by calculating two-dimensional overlap metrics, ignoring vertical overlap in the water column. Dive profiles of 21 fin whales instrumented with time-depth recorders in the Azores were used to estimate the proportion of time spent within reach of vessel draughts across the north-east Atlantic. Fin whales were at greater vertical risk at night, with a median dive depth of 5m compared to 12m during daylight hours. When vertical risk was integrated into temporal-spatial variation of vessel characteristics and animal distribution, 972 collisions were estimated to occur annually, of which 641 were likely to be fatal. This is well above the estimated sustainable potential biological removal level of 131 individuals a year in this region. Simulation of potential mitigation measures indicated that re-routeing vessels may be largely infeasible whereas slowdowns may be more practical and effective. However, how such measures would be accepted by the shipping industry remains to be seen. These findings provide a quantitative assessment of ship strike risk and inform mitigation methods for a vulnerable cetacean species, providing an invaluable basis for discussions with environmental managers and maritime authorities.
Point Processes for Leopard Shark Aggregation PatternsLeopard sharks (Triakis semifasciata) are highly vulnerable to overharvesting due to their low fecundity and long gestation periods. They have been observed to aggregate nearshore in shallow warm waters to increase physiological functions but at the survival cost of predation by other marine mammals. It is hypothesized that a desirable temperature envelope in shallow water may not be enough to drive aggregation there unless conditions can only be found in that shallow water. Novel data on leopard sharks have been collected via UAV (unmanned aerial vehicle) surveys of Emerald Bay, California, USA. Taking “snapshots” of the dynamic environment, we can estimate the locations of sharks in the bay. We address the questions of what temperatures sharks tend to select for relative to a range of temperatures, and if there could be spatial autocorrelation after accounting for temperatures. We fit a joint log-Gaussian Cox Process (LGCP) model to replicates of flights, included as a random effect to account for variability among replicates caused by different conditions on different flights. We analyse the spatial distribution of leopard sharks in relation to environmental covariates of temperature and tide levels. To account for any spatial autocorrelation unexplained by the covariates, a spatially structured random effect is included. Any remaining variation across grid cells is accounted for by an unstructured random effect. We use the integrated nested Laplace approximation (INLA) approach to fit and compare models by the deviance information criterion (DIC) and create visualizations using the leaflet package to map the random effects and 95% credible intervals for the predicted intensity of each flight. Our estimates indicate statistical significance of both covariates, with more leopard sharks tending to occur in areas of relatively warmer water temperatures and higher tide levels. A distinct cluster was identified in the Eastern region outside of the favourable environmental conditions, suggesting potentially other covariates driving aggregation. This analysis has implications for conservation management of leopard sharks by understanding their habitat selection which has become of increasing concern given rising ocean temperatures and climate change altering the locations of the favourable habitat.
Spatial population modelling of southern white rhinoceros, Ceratotherium simum simum, in Kruger National ParkThe conservation status of the southern white rhino (Ceratotherium simum simum) is currently classified as “near threatened”. Ongoing poaching for their horns, however, may degrade southern white rhino populations in future. For instance, population numbers in the Kruger National Park (Kruger) declined significantly from 8,968 (95% CI: 8,394-9,564) individuals in 2013 to 2,607 (95% CI: 2,475–2,752) by 2020.Poaching has driven the decline, although the severe drought of 2015/2016 also influenced this trend. The combined consequences of increased death rates and decreased birth rates have led to the decline in white rhino numbers in Kruger. Poaching pressure creates “ecological traps” within the range of white rhinos, i.e. areas that white rhinos preferentially select, but which also harbour increased risks of mortality. Park anti- poaching initiatives seek to identify these areas to prioritize ranger presence and law enforcement. To accomplish that, we are combining a Step Selection Function (SSF) approach with the extensive database of rhino collar (2016-2018) held by South African National Parks. The SSF model utilises the finer scale (spatial and temporal) dynamics of rhino movement in Kruger to predict future movement patterns based on the preferences of the different environmental variables. We provide a summary of the above mentioned extensive database of rhino collar (2016-2018) and census (1989-present) data held by South African National Parks that will ultimately train and validate our model.
Figuring out what counts: evaluating the effect of data quantity and quality on the performance of integrated population modelsIntegrated population models (IPMs) are an increasingly popular tool for population modeling in ecology. By combining datasets in a unified analysis, integrated population models link demographic rates with population dynamics and can thereby reduce bias, improve precision, and estimate parameters that would otherwise be unidentifiable using traditional approaches. However, the conditions under which IPMs outperform singular data analyses are poorly understood. In this study, we assessed the performance of IPMs across a range of life history parameters, population trajectories, and data availability scenarios using simulated count, mark-resight, and productivity data typical of a passerine bird monitoring program. We examined relative bias and root mean squared error across models when all three datasets were included versus when one or two datasets were omitted. We varied detection probabilities in the count and mark- resight datasets to evaluate the effect of data quality on IPM performance. In general, higher bias was observed in parameters when datasets that directly informed those parameters were omitted. Higher detection rates alone did little to reduce bias in demographic rate parameters; however, higher detection rates in count surveys were more effective at reducing uncertainty in abundance trends compared with integrating other datasets. Our results suggest that the unique context of a given monitoring program and study species will largely determine whether the collection of additional data versus improving the quality (i.e., detection rates or sample sizes) of existing data streams more effectively improves model performance. Practitioners should carefully consider the best ways of answering the specific ecological or management questions of interest (i.e., estimating demography versus detecting abundance trends) given the life history of the species and the costs of additional data collection. This work provides a foundation from which to further explore the performance of IPM frameworks and for designing monitoring programs and considering the trade-offs between the costs and benefits of collecting additional data when monitoring resources are scarce.
Modelling spatial species distributions with Bayes ruleSpecies distribution models are a popular tool to predict the (potential) distribution of species as a function of environmental variables. Even though the maps produced by these methods are easy to read, the methods are usually optimised for obtaining good predictive performance leading to a loss of interpretability of the fitted relationships. We introduce a novel method for species distribution modelling that allows for greater flexibility, interpretability and testing of model hypotheses.This method models the available presence-background data directly by fitting density functions to both datatypes and infers probability of presence by application of Bayes’ rule. Flexibility is given to the modeller in determining the density functions for both presence and background distributions. Covariance between independent variables can be modelled by addition of copulas or through fitting multivariate kernel density functions.The major strength of this method lies in increased interpretability of the model, and in the ability to test different biological hypothesis on the distribution of different species or groups within species. The possibility of model generalization along with hypothesis testing can lead to improved use of available (limited) data. All of this is expected to lead to more transparent species distribution models, an important demand from the policy domain.In this presentation we showcase progress on the development and application of this method to several casestudies, as well as on establishment data of invasive tree pests in Europe.
A novel modelling framework to quantify phylogenetic structure in ecologically-relevant variablesInvestigating the evolutionary processes that structure biodiversity distribution is critical, particularly in a time of rapid global change. Phylogenetic information has helped provide a new perspective on species distributions across space and time; determining the extent to which ecologically relevant variables are phylogenetically conserved is important to understanding the causes of biodiversity distribution and its evolutionary and ecological consequences. Current methods to detect phylogenetic structure in ecological variables often rely on strong assumptions of underlying trait models or are performed as ad-hoc analyses,i.e. not as part of a probabilistic model.We present a new hierarchical Bayesian modelling framework that jointly estimates species-environment associations and phylogenetic correlation in associations. We utilize a latent Gaussian process to link species’ ecological niches to phylogenetic structure. The latent process represents our mechanistic understanding of how a given clade evolved. We demonstrate the ability of this model to capture the phylogenetic structure in ecological niche for different models of trait evolution, levels of phylogenetic signal, and varying tree topologies. Further, we explore how Gaussian processes with different kernels in this framework can connect to distinct evolutionary patterns and can therefore be used as a general framework for hypothesis testing.Estimating phylogenetic correlation in a joint modelling framework leads to robust inference over all parameters of the model, reduces bias in parameter estimation, and produces valid uncertainty estimates. The model we present has the additional advantage of providing pairwise estimation of phylogenetic correlation between species across each ecological variable. In the context of climate change, this is informative of how rapidly a clade might adapt to change across each of its niche axes. This analysis addresses the question of whether ecological variables that are most predictive in species distribution models are evolutionarily labile or conserved. The answer is of significance to the forecasting of biodiversity distribution under climate change.
Comparing statistical methods to estimate sound production rates based on animal borne tag dataPassive acoustic monitoring (PAM) is a promising approach for monitoring and estimating abundance of many visually cryptic species, in particular those inhabiting areas that are difficult for humans to access, like marine mammals. One of the specific methods available is cue counting, where a density of sounds per unit time and area is converted into animal spatial density via a cue rate. While it seems simple to estimate a cue rate, several challenges arise in practice, from how to collect a sample of animals to how to record the data of interest. Assuming we can instrument a representative sample of animals with sound recording tags, the job is done. Or is it? Here we use a very large data set to compare several possible methods for estimating cue rates. The data come from 120 tagged sperm whales, collected at 8 locations over 13 years, with tag durations from 0.3 to 36 hours, including over 6 million vocalizations and 85 million depth measurements.The cue rate estimation methods compared are: (1) using the raw number of sounds divided by the tag duration, (2) using means and weighted means across tags, (3) modelling the number of cues per time unit in a traditional regression modelling approach, (4) a temporal point pattern, where the sound production intensity is modeled directly, and (5) a Hidden Markov model approach, where first we model behavioral states and then estimate cue rates conditional on those behavioral states. Having the same goal, the different statistical approaches have implications on the estimated cue rate variability and on how one might use relevant covariates to predict cue rates for other times and places beyond the specific tags considered. The next survey might be for a place (and certainly will be for a time) these tags where not collected at. We discuss these aspects in the context of using cue rates to estimating animal abundance in a PAM framework.
An adaptive geostatistical sampling design for biodiversity studies via citizen scienceBiodiversity estimates using data collected in citizen science studies typically showcase opportunistic sampling bias, often partly caused by a mechanism termed preferential sampling. This represents processes that generate sampling locations that are stochastically dependent on the spatial process that underlies the biodiversity dynamics. Preferential sampling can be corrected for by fitting a joint generalized linear mixed model where a geostatistical model of the outcome of interest shares a spatial random effect with a log- Gaussian Cox process that models the choice of sampling locations. However, data collection in citizen science is often simultaneously driven by multiple latent sampling processes that are difficult to disentangle, which often renders the model-based corrections still suboptimal.We therefore could attempt to improve data quality at the sampling stage. A lattice-plus-close-pairs (LPCP) design is a geostatistical randomisation method consisting of a randomised systematic grid design, which allows for the optimal estimation of the spatial parameters in geostatistical models, in combination with a set of sampling points that lie in close proximity to each other, to efficiently estimate small-scale spatial variation. Due to its labour intensiveness, this sampling design is not recommended in a citizen science context. We have therefore developed an adaptive spatio-temporal LPCP design, which is set up as follows:at time 0, a spatial LPCP design is constructed and citizens are asked to collect data at a set of locations;based on the adherence to the protocol, a preferential or non-preferential geostatistical model is fitted to the data and prediction uncertainty is evaluated; (iii) at time 1, the randomisation process is updated such that data points on locations with larger prediction uncertainties obtain more sampling priority. Afterwards, (ii) and (iii) are updated iteratively until the end of the study period. This design is evaluated using simulation studies, based on Belgian species richness data collected by LIKONA, a local citizen science organization. It is implemented in a LIKONA study on invertebrate monitoring. Our results show considerable improvement of species richness estimates when the adaptive LCPC design is implemented in comparison to those coming from data that were collected without adhering to a protocol.
The sspm R package: spatial surplus production models for the management of northern shrimp fisheriesSpatial Surplus Production Models (SSPMs) are spatially explicit models of fisheries productivity designed to inform stock management. Like other fisheries management tools, such models can be technically convoluted and their deployment is often limited by code availability, quality and accessibility. We present the R package sspm, a flexible framework aimed at making SSPMs easier for managers to apply in the context of the Northern Shrimp (Pandalus borealis) fisheries. Although one of the most economically important stocks in Canadian waters, the Northern Shrimp in shrimp fishing areas (SFAs) 4 to 6 currently lack a population model to predict how fishing pressure and changing environmental conditions may affect future shrimp abundance. To fill this gap, we developed a lag-1 autoregressive SSPM that included predictors such as Atlantic Cod (Gadus morhua) density, alternate predator density, temperature, and Northern Shrimp biomass. This model was later adapted into the sspm package. We will show how the model design is effectively abstracted by the package design and further demonstrate how the package can be easily used by managers to forecast fisheries productivity under different management regimes. Finally we will discuss choices in the design of the user interface and reflect on best practices when it comes to adapting research code into management tools.
Comparable roadkill rates using open-population capture-recapture modelsA comparable roadkill metric is necessary to make inferences between different roads, periods, and species and thus to better plan and access mitigation effectiveness. As carcass counting on roads has associated sampling errors due to imperfect detection, roadkill rates must account for carcass detection and persistence probabilities and not be only based on the observed number. Open-population models used to estimate demographic parameters in living animal populations can be adapted to the context of roadkills and account for these issues. Here, we present an approach using carcass capture-recapture data and an open-population model to estimate comparable roadkill rates under a Bayesian framework. For that, we used roadkill data from the white-eared opossum (Didelphis albiventris) and the black-and-white tegu lizard (Salvator merianae) recorded on four road stretches from Southernmost Brazil. Data was collected during four consecutive road survey (occasions) isits in seven independent sampling sessions for one stretch and during eight occasions in two sampling sessions for the other three. Carcass received a unique identification used to recognize individuals over the occasions, that were gathered in capture histories. Data was fitted to the superpopulation formulation of the open-population model and the daily roadkill rate per kilometer was derived from samples of Bayesian posteriori distributions. We recorded 1501 captures from 461 carcasses of opossums, and 511 captures, from 217 carcasses of tegus. The estimated roadkill metric (with its associated uncertainty) gives roadkill numbers from a known time interval and stretch length and account for imperfect detection without the necessity to perform extra experiments besides the repeated visits.Precision in the estimates was higher as the number of captures and recaptures increased, which resulted in higher precision for surveys with eight occasions and for the most captured species, the opossum. By using the roadkill rate we found different rankings between stretches and sessions when compared to observed data. This approach could be adapted to estimate fatalities from other infrastructures for which repeated observations of marked carcasses are an option.
Integrated ecological trend analysis from combining GAMs with meta- analysisMany ecological systems undergo long-term monitoring with mismatches between the time-scale of monitoring and the time-scale of important trends. In our motivating problem, chlorophyll-a (chl-a, a proxy for phytoplankton) levels have been measured in San Francisco Bay roughly every two weeks for several decades. Chl-a is a basic aspect of water quality and aquatic ecosystem status that can fluctuate rapidly over time scales of weeks. We sought to estimate long-term trends in seasonally-averaged chl-a levels but found that existing methods from the water research literature were not well-suited for this purpose. Most existing methods try to separate time-series data into components such as a long-term trend and a seasonal component but in various ways either: do not easily provide uncertainties; assume seasonal components are consistent across years; do not accommodate different sampling in different years; or do not easily incorporate other variables. GAMs provide a natural solution to smooth the raw data and estimate uncertainties for integrated features such as seasonal (e.g. spring) averages or timing or magnitudes of seasonal peaks. We estimate and test long-term (across-year) trends in seasonal (within-year) features by propagating standard errors derived from GAMs into mixed-effects meta-analysis models. Meta-analysis is usually used for combining results from multiple studies, but the key feature of meta-analysis models is to include an already-estimated standard deviation for each response datum. Mixed-effects meta-analysis also includes unexplained ecological variation as a random effect. This methodology is appealing because it allows a "data product" from GAMs fitted to the raw data to be used in further analyses while propagating uncertainties. It also avoids difficult problems that would be encountered if trying to formulate a single model for the entire analysis, which is often a desirable goal. The combination of GAMs and meta-analysis to mesh different scales of monitoring vs. analysis questions is new in the domain of aquatic trend analysis, and indeed the use of meta-analysis as a general tool for uncertainty propagation may be under- appreciated. Examples, results, and a software package from the San Francisco Bay system will be presented.
Modeling the Feedback Between Movement and Thermoregulation in Ectotherms with Hidden Markov ModelsThe thermoregulation process of the Podarcis muralis, or the common wall lizard, is a constant cost-benefit analysis working towards the lizard’s optimal body temperature while conserving energy expenditure. We collected 12 lizards to study their movement and thermoregulation process in a lab setting by conducting 2- hour thermal preference trials in a 1m thermal gradient arena. Position data was extracted from video footage at one second intervals for each lizard using the Python based automated movement tracking software, Tracktor. The movement data was analyzed using two different extensions of the hidden Markov model (HMM). The first approach included lizard body temperature and substrate temperature as covariates in the state switching dynamics. The second method is a novel approach for animal movement analysis using an extension of HMMs which incorporates a feedback mechanism between the behavioural states and the thermoregulation process. We allow for the rate at which the lizards regulate their body temperature to be a function of both substrate temperature and the underlying behavioral state, while maintaining body temperature as a covariate in the state-switching dynamics of the HMM. Incorporating this feedback mechanism is of ecological significance as the movement behaviour of ectotherms can affect their thermoregulation process. The analysis conducted is fully reproducible using the R package lizardHMM which was developed for the purpose of this study.
Whales and earthquakes: adapting distance sampling for use with Ocean Bottom Seismometer data for baleen whale density surface estimationMonitoring programs to determine marine mammal densities are costly, so using opportunistic data from instrumentation deployed for other purposes is one way to achieve cost efficiency. However, using such data often requires adjustments be made to standard analytical methods. Ocean bottom seismometers (OBSs) are prime examples of such “platforms of opportunity”: they were designed to detect earthquakes and study other geophysical processes, but can also record the low frequency calls of baleen whales, particularly blue and fin whales. Further, OBSs are increasingly being deployed in large arrays for periods of a year or more. Depending on the oceanographic properties and instrument configuration, locations of calling whales may be estimated. Therefore, distance sampling can be used to estimate the detection function for OBSs, leading to an estimate of whale density. However, a practical issue is that some OBSs may only detect whales, but not locate them. This impacts distance sampling because the distances at which whale calls can be both detected and localised by an OBS may be smaller than simply detecting calls. Here we use a case study from the south coast of Portugal to demonstrate how a distance sampling analysis was adapted to incorporate detections from non-localising OBSs to work towards a density surface of fin whales. Of the 24 OBSs deployed between September 2007 and August 2008, 12 of the instruments could not estimate distances to fin whale calls. Multiple-covariate distance sampling was used to estimate the detection function using data from the localising OBSs. Depth and month were used as covariates, enabling detection functions for the non-localising OBSs to be estimated. Next, for each non-localising OBS, the estimated probability density function was used to scale the number of fin whale detections to remove a proportion of calls that were likely detectable but not localisable. Finally, the resulting detections were combined with the data from the localising OBSs in a spatio-temporal GAM to estimate a density surface of fin whale calls, which can be converted to a fin whale density surface with an appropriate multiplier of fin whale call production rate.
Using HMSC models to understand interaction assemblyRecently, an extension of hierarchical modeling of species communities (HMSC) has been applied to evaluate how species traits affect the strength of pairwise interactions (HMSC-I). In classical HMSC models, species environmental responses are sampled from a common distribution whose expected values depend on species traits and phylogeny. In HMSC-I model, interaction rates depend on trait-matching between partners and their phylogeny. For example, interaction strength between frugivores and plants can rely on animal preferences for small fruits, which in turn depends on their body size and some phylogenetically- preserved behavior like fruit-handling.HMSC-I formulation results particularly attractive for studying interactions since it reflects in a simple and tractable way the behavioral mechanisms underpinning partner choices. From a theoretical perspective, it allows to quantify the relative effect of trait-matching vs coevolution in interaction assembly or rank traits according to their importance. Both issues are cornerstone questions of interaction research. From an applied standpoint, HMSC-I model can predict pairwise interactions in new environmental contexts, which is critical in a global change scenario. Finally, HMSC-I model can provide valuable information about foraging preferences of rare species, something largely overlooked.To illustrate the potential of HMSC-I, we used a zero-inflated model that quantifies trait and phylogeny effects on plant-frugivore interaction networks from contrasting communities. According to the theory of forbidden interactions, we expect trait-matching between fruit diameter and frugivores’ body size to determine the probability of an interaction to occur (not all fruits can be handled by small frugivores). In addition, we expect species abundances and fruit nutrient content to affect interaction rates. This reflectsthat common species encounter more frequently and highly frugivorous’ species restrict their diet to sugar- rich fruits. Finally, we hypothesize that the strength of trait effects will depend on the community context. In communities with a higher number of fruiting species or more functionally diverse, animals can be more selective; thus, trait effects should be stronger. In contrast, in communities with a lower number of resources available, animals should forage more randomly, and hence, interactions would mostly depend on species-specific abundances. We hope this work stimulates applying HSMC models to interaction research.
Multiple-observer protocol for drone-based abundance estimation: integrating counts from manual review and accessible deep learning algorithmsReviewing large image sets remains a major challenge for wildlife abundance estimation from drone-based surveys, especially for rare and threatened species. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide a straightforward framework to automatically detect wildlife in aerial imagery, although their implementation can be tricky for non-experts and small image sets. Motivated by the need to develop a pipeline for automated detection and abundance estimation of the threatened marsh deer, we i) explore deep learning techniques (convolutional neural networks) accessible to ecologists to detect rare wildlife species in drone imagery and ii) evaluate the incorporation of algorithm detections through a semiautomatic procedure in multiple-observer models for wildlife abundance estimation from drone-based surveys.We trained two CNNs using transfer learning and fine-tuning to classify drone image tiles into “deer” or “background” (non-deer). We evaluated algorithm performance in a test set for each trained CNN and with a consensus method. A human observer checked algorithm detections to discard false positives (semiautomated review). Manual and semiautomated individual detections were integrated under detection histories and fitted using a multiple observer closed-population capture-recapture model.The consensus classification approach produced a 3.5-fold increase in precision while reducing only 0.09 the proportion of deer samples detected, when compared to each algorithm independently. Compared to manual reviewing, the semiautomated procedure greatly reduced the time needed to review images (from two months to 66 hours) while providing a similar detection probability of deer individuals available in the imagery. Planning drone flights with frontal overlapping in the images can enlarge the number of samples for training and improve algorithm detection.Deep learning has become increasingly accessible for ecologists and conservationists to develop their own detection algorithms. A multiple-observer approach including manual and semiautomated reviewing can be used to address algorithms’ false-negative errors while avoiding false positives in abundance estimation.Monitoring programs of threatened species can greatly benefit from this to achieve timely assessments of abundance estimates from drone-based surveys in times of rapid environmental changes.Direct (conditional) and net (marginal) effects of environmental predictors in multivariate normal and autologistic models for multispecies modeling understanding the effect of the environment on species’ abundance and habitat selection is one of the fundamental questions in community ecology besides interspecies interactions. Among the vast literature on multivariate multispecies models, the multivariate normal and autologistic models are the two most widely used. During the formulation of these models, distinguishment is usually made on interspecies interactions about whether the interaction is direct (conditional) or net (marginal), i.e. conditioning on other species and environment or not. For instance, when the direct interaction among species is of interest, researchers use the precision matrix rather than the covariance matrix in the multivariate normal distribution. However, similar distinguishment over conditional and marginal effects is usually not made on species’ reaction to the environment. An environment’s effect on one species can also be both direct (conditional) and net (marginal) when in multispecies models. The distinguishment is more important when sparsity of interactions (between environment and species as well as interspecies interactions) is to be imposed as conditional sparsity and marginal sparsity are usually not compatible. In autologistics models, some authors propose to use a centering term to account for a “large scale” effect of the environment which approximates a marginal effect. When the conditional effect is of interest, formulating the model without a centering term will give parameters clear interpretations in terms of conditional distributions, but keeping the usual 1-0 coding for presence-absence can be problematic as in the model has the same penalty on co-absence (0x0=0) and only one exists (0x1=0). We propose to use a symmetric +1/-1 coding without a centering term when the conditional effect is of interest. Under normal settings, the regression coefficients with usual mean-precision parameterization should be interpreted as marginal effect of environment (i.e. marginal over all other species). If a conditional effect of environment is of interest, one should use an alternative model to multivariate normal regression namely normal chain graph model (or equivalently a conditional autoregression). We present a Bayesian graphical selection method for the chain graph model to learn sparse networks among species and environments.
Explicitly integrating trophic interactions in species distribution models improves ecological niche estimations and predictionsBiotic interactions are certainly one of the main processes ruling the assembly of multitrophic species communities. Yet, there is no species distribution model (SDM) explicitly accounting for biotic interactions. Here, we propose a framework that combines knowledge of trophic interactions with Bayesian structural equation models to model each species as a function either of its prey, or of its predators, and environmental conditions. We tested and validated our framework on realistic ecological communities simulated with a generalised Lotka-Volterra model. We show that our multitrophic SDMs improve inference of both fundamental and realised niches compared to classical SDMs, especially for species with a strong biotic control, ultimately increasing model predictive performances. Our framework stands out as a novel solution to model multitrophic communities distribution when trophic interactions are known.
Spatio-temporal trends and effects of oceanic noise on whale acoustic occurrence off the west coast of South AfricaOceanic noise has been globally shown to negatively affect marine organisms; yet, little to no noise research has been done around most African coasts including South Africa’s. Here, we aimed to quantitatively describe seasonal spatio-temporal oceanic trends of ambient noise and its impact on acoustic occurrence of six whale species (Antarctic blue, fin, minke, southern right, humpback and sperm whales) off South Africa’s west coast between 2014 and 2017. Passive acoustic monitoring data were collected using autonomous acoustic recorders deployed at 885, 1118 and 4400 m water depths. Depending on the maximum frequency of recordings, noise levels were categorized into the following frequency bands (Hz): 10–500, 500–1000, 1000–2000, 2000–3000, and 3000–4000. We evaluated effects of oceanographic conditions (wave height and period, current speed, zonal and meridional wind speed, total precipitation, month and hour) and vessel traffic on noise levels at different frequency bands for each recording site using random forest (RF) models. Pairwise correlation revealed strong correlation between frequency bands, we therefore used principal component analysis (PCA) to assess the directional relationship between frequency bands. PCA showed that 10–500 Hz frequency band was heading towards a different direction than other frequency bands. The lowest and highest frequency band for each recording site were used to model the effect of noise levels on whale acoustic occurrences. RF model results identified the following variables as the most important predictors of noise level: month for recorder deployed at 855 m water depth, month and wind speed for recorders deployed at 1118 m water depth, and ocean current speed for the recorder deployed at 4400 m water depth. Low frequency band (10–500 Hz) noise level highly influenced acoustic occurrence of all baleen whale species, while sperm whale acoustic occurrence was influenced by both low and high frequency bands. These results show that vessel traffic did not significantly contribute towards ambient noise level in this region, but it is important to continue to monitor noise levels given increases in blue economy related activities. We provide baseline noise level information for the west coast of South Africa.
Species’ responses to anthropogenic habitats across the United StatesHabitat conversion is the primary threat to terrestrial wildlife. Biologists generally categorize species into three groups based on how they respond: species that have readily adapted and now specialize on anthropogenic habitats; those that are restricted to natural environments; and habitat generalists.However, recent studies suggest that different populations of the same species may respond differently to habitat conversion. That is, in some areas species may readily occupy anthropogenic habitats whereas, in others they may not. Understanding the contexts in which species can be conserved alongside humans in working landscapes, and when protected areas are essential, is key to designing effective conservation plans for wildlife in the Anthropocene. Here, we leverage a large-scale camera trapping dataset, Snapshot USA, with over 2000 sites distributed across the US. Using community occupancy modelling of wide-ranging mammals, we ask two key questions: First, are species’ responses to anthropogenic habitats (i.e., agriculture and urban areas) consistent across their range? Or do species change their habitat affiliations, acting as anthropogenic habitat specialists, natural habitat specialists, or habitat generalists in some regions but not others? We predict that although some species will always avoid or affiliate with anthropogenic habitats, many habitat generalists strongly affiliate with anthropogenic habitats in some regions and natural habitats in others. Second, can spatial variation in macroclimate explain species responses to habitat conversion? We predict that in especially warm/dry regions, species will become more restricted to natural environments. This is because many anthropogenic habitats are stressful and lack the key microhabitats needed to avoid temperature extremes. We discuss our findings at both species and community levels.
More dirty little secrets: effect of process and observation errors on inference in a nonlinear non-normal SSMSSMs are a useful tool in ecology due to their flexibility and ease of formulation to model ecological processes. They allow flexible integration of various traits like random effects, facilitate separating the underlying biological process from the measurements made on that process, and naturally fit well in a Bayesian framework. However, when complex models are considered, we need to be cautious with interpreting the results. In a 2016 paper (doi: 10.1038/srep26677), Auger-Méthé and coauthors showed that estimation problems can even occur in simple linear Gaussian SSMs when observation error is larger than biological process error. We analyze the effects of changing the process and observation error in a non-linear and non-Gaussian population model of the UK Grey seal population. We demonstrate that even with a low observation error, posterior distributions can still be fairly uninformative if only the marginalposterior distributions of the parameters are considered. We also discuss the effect on the variance and bias of the posterior distribution when the ratio of process to observation error is changed.
Leveraging sharing of camera-trap data to inform biodiversity conservation at large scalesWhile the spatio-temporal impact of anthropogenic activities on biodiversity has considerably increased in the last few decades, our ability to assess the impact of these activities on species at such large scales has lagged behind. However, advancements in technology and statistical methods, and new initiatives that promote data sharing are making it possible to fill this gap. Occupancy is one of the main criteria to assign species to IUCN Red List Categories, but too often trends in occupancy at large scales are only established qualitatively. We present an approach that allows a statistically-based and robust assessment of population and species status at large spatial scales.We leverage camera trap data shared by different organizations through the recently established platform Wildlife Insights to assess which are the main types of human disturbance that drive range-wide trends in occupancy in several species of mammals and birds. Pooling data across projects, we created species- specific datasets containing information collected in different areas within the range of each species and over multiple years. We then applied single-species Bayesian hierarchical occupancy models to estimate local and range-wide trends in occupancy as a function of different proxies of human disturbance, including changes in forest cover and human population density. We accounted for the structure of the data (e.g. camera-trap sites within projects) using nested random effects. Finally, we used these estimates to assess which species were most affected and what were the traits that characterized them.Our results can inform the management and conservation of many species at a scale beyond the single protected area, network, or political jurisdiction. We emphasize that this advancement in understanding trends at large scales can be made possible only by researchers and organizations willing to share their data and by initiatives, such as Wildlife Insights, that work to facilitate data sharing. Our modelling exercise is, thus, also an example of what collaboration among scientists can achieve for preserving global biodiversity.
Using ecological diffusion to inform management of a recovering apex predatorThe reintroduction and recovery of predators can be ecologically beneficial as well as socially and economically controversial. However, the growth and expansion of predator populations, and thus their ecological, social, and economic impacts, are not static; they are dynamic in both space and time. We propose a spatiotemporal modeling framework to better inform the ecology and management of recovering predators and demonstrate its utility by applying it to a recovering sea otter (Enhydra lutris) population in southeast Alaska, where sea otters were reintroduced in the late 1960s and have since exhibited unprecedented population growth and range expansion. The framework combines, into a Bayesian hierarchical structure, multiple data sources and a model of ecological diffusion that accounts for density- dependent population growth. The hierarchical ecological diffusion model is continuous in space and time allowing flexibility to make inferences about particular areas of interest (e.g., proposed management units), as well as how those areas can be monitored and incorporated into the model structure. Estimated parameters yield inferences about movement and population ecology and our approach provides multiple derived quantities of interest, such as local current and equilibrium abundance and, of particular utility for management, equilibrium differential. We used our model to learn about how density dependence and equilibrium abundance of sea otters vary spatially across a region, in part driven by spatial variation in the effect of natural resource management on density dependence. Our results also suggest ways in which a dynamic management strategy could be developed and optimized as the population continues to grow and expand its range. While we applied this hierarchical diffusion modeling approach to a recolonizing sea otter population, it could be applied to aid the management of many (re)colonizing predators as well as other taxa.
How many knots? Constructing spatiotemporal approximations that yield good out of sample predictive performanceSpatial and spatiotemporal models are increasingly used in ecology. Such models have been used to track population change over time, assess changing species distributions, and model spatial population processes (e.g., predation, habitat use, or fishing impacts). Computational advances over the last decade have allowed for the rapid estimation of spatial approximations to high-dimensional surfaces using a Stochastic Partial Differentiation Equation (SPDE) approach. These methods are accessible in several widely used packages, including INLA (Integrated Nested Laplace Approximation). One of the most critical decisions for building models using the SPDE approach is how to construct the spatial approximation ("mesh"). Example decisions include the resolution of the latent approximation and location of vertices ("knots"). Limited guidance has been established in constructing these approximations, with some previous applications suggesting that higher resolution meshes result in better predictive performance. In this talk, we explore how mesh construction and dimensionality affects the predictive performance of spatiotemporal generalized linear mixed-effect models (GLMMs). We use simulated data, and a long-running dataset on commercially fished species on the west coast of the USA, to build spatiotemporal models of occurrence and density, using a delta-modeling framework. Our results highlight that for both presence-absence and positive sub-models, the highest resolution meshes considered result in overfitting and decreased out-of-sample predictive performance. Models with intermediate mesh complexity also resulted in improved parameter estimates and derived quantities (indices of abundance) over coarse- or high-resolution meshes. These results held across a range of species occurrences and cross-validation sampling schemes (random, spatially blocked).Finally, we discuss strategies and guidance for constructing SPDE meshes that do not require an exhaustive search.
Modelling species communities through space and time using crowdsourced datasetsJoint species distribution models (JSDMs) are becoming increasingly popular for the analysis of species community data. Their rising popularity coincides with the increasing availability of crowdsourced biodiversity data through citizen science initiatives and the digitization of natural history collections. Most JSDMs, however, cannot deal with the challenges intrinsic to these opportunistic data sources, such as imperfect and heterogeneous detection probabilities. We developed a spatio-temporal joint species distribution model that flexibly acknowledges imperfect detection. Specifically, we combined a spatio- temporal Factorisation Machine approach with a comprehensive site-occupancy approach to model occupancy and detection patterns across the considered species. We performed Bayesian inference through the probabilistic programming language Stan and applied the developed model to large datasets on invertebrate occurrences in Belgium, encompassing historical records as well as contemporary sightings by naturalists. By doing so, we were able to gain insights at both the species and the community level, ranging from species-specific distribution maps, distributional trends and phenological patterns, to species-to- species associations and shifts in the composition of natural communities over time. We argue that extending joint species distribution models to flexibly accommodate imperfect detection enables the study of species communities at an unprecedented scale due to their ability to harness a wider variety of datasets.
On the importance of constraining tree demography parameterisation with species distributionsNiche theory has been applied to project tree species distribution in response to environmental factors. Often the niche, and therefore the associated species distribution, is projected using the correlation between current distribution and abiotic variables only. However, the niche is commonly defined as the set of environmental conditions that allows a species to maintain a positive intrinsic growth rate, r. This growth rate represents the performance of a population in function of the demography of its individuals: an increase in radial growth and fecundity should also increase r, while an increase in mortality should decrease r. However, measuring r is not straightforward, particularly for size-structured populations such as trees. A second problem is that individual growth (mortality) does not necessarily decrease (increase) towards range margins, making tree range limits difficult to predict from demographic rates. Finally, tree demographic rates are complicated to estimate at large scale due to high variability in environmental conditions and coarse time resolution of the National Forest Inventories data.Our goal is to develop a dynamic range model. First, we estimate yearly tree demography (radial growth and mortality) with a Bayesian state-space model. This allows us to use annual climate data, even though forest census are conducted at uneven time intervals. The regeneration is inversely calibrated. Then, the demographic rates are used as priors into a population dynamics model from which we can deduce the population growth rate r for each plot in the National Forest Inventories data. We then compare r to presence and absence data. Because we expect a high probability of presence when r is positive, we can constrain the likelihood of the demographic rates and reevaluate them in the light of the mismatch between predicted population growth rates and presence/absence data.
Estimating Population Demographics and Allowable Take for Peregrine Falcons (Falco peregrinus) in North AmericaThe Migratory Bird Treaty Act requires the US Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) to govern the take of wild migratory birds, including raptors for their use in falconry. Following the successful recovery of peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus) populations across North America, the FWS, in collaboration with the North American Flyway Councils, States, and representatives of the falconry community, have conservatively managed the reinitiating of harvest of peregrines, with harvest reflecting regional and local management sensitivities. To provide scientific basis for management, FWS periodically reviews the available information on population status and size for a species through a broad scale Status Assessment, a process currently underway for the peregrine falcon. We developed a female-based integrated population model (IPM) in a Bayesian framework that will aid the Status Assessment by estimating population size allowing relevant management agencies to evaluate the status and effects of harvest on peregrine falcons in North America. Our IPM combines long-term banding data, fall migration counts, Breeding Bird Survey counts, and productivity data to estimate trends in abundance and demographic parameters of peregrine falcons in North America. The abundance, fecundity, and survival submodels incorporate population-specific effects separating peregrines into a northern and southern population (division occurring at 54° N latitude) with the survival submodel also accounting for differences in survival across age (first-year and after-first-year) and season (summer and winter). We will use the IPM output to estimate the allowable harvest of migratory first-year (passage) peregrine falcons using a prescribed take level model.
Analyzing behavioral-state dependent habitat selection using Hidden Markov Models in combination with Integrated Step Selection AnalysisSpace-use behaviors emerge from the interplay of internal state and external factors. An animal’s internal state changes through time and, in turn, space-use behaviors – including habitat selection – should change depending on internal motivations. Behavioral state dependence in habitat selection is rarely acknowledged, but ignoring it can confound the inference we make on habitat selection processes and mislead our estimates of habitat suitability. We investigated the effect of behavioral state on habitat selection of female greater sage-grouse translocated from Wyoming to North Dakota. Translocated animals undergo post-release behavioral modification after release, initially focusing on exploring their new environment before eventually settling. We expected sage-grouse habitat selection to differ between the initial exploration phase and after settling. We used Hidden-Markov Models combined with Integrated Step Selection Analysis to, first, segment individual trajectories into behavioral states (exploratory and restricted) and, second, quantify habitat selection in each state while accounting for seasonality and individual reproductive status. In the exploratory state, sage-grouse selected for high sagebrush cover in all seasons; during winter, they also selected for gentle slopes and avoided roads. In the restricted state, females with broods selected for high herbaceous cover and roads. When they did not have a brood, sage-grouse in restricted state selected for gentle slopes year-round and otherwise used resources in proportion to their availability. Features selected in restricted state, not in exploratory state, are likely to be indicative of suitable settlement habitat; thus, accounting for underlying behavioral states is important when habitat selection estimates are used to inform selection of future release sites. Our results demonstrate that sage- grouse adjust their habitat selection to their current internal state and exemplify the need to account for behavior in habitat selection studies. We discuss the statistical limitations of our approach, namely the lack of uncertainty propagation between the behavioral state assignment and the habitat selection estimation, and we suggest possible future avenues to improve on our approach.
Incorporating spatial learning into movement models for naïve animals in a novel environmentOne of the principal challenges free-ranging animals face is acquiring information about available resources, which are generally patchily distributed and seasonal in nature. In learning about the environment, animals reduce uncertainty and can make more informed behavioral decisions that ultimately lead to greater fitness benefits. Learning and memory play an important role in how animals exploit their environment. Current models of animal movement rarely account for an individual’s past experience when setting out to understand their future behavior, and are often fit without accounting for underlying behaviors (in non- Markovian frameworks) and the inherently autocorrelated nature of movement data. By developing robust methods to incorporate underlying behavior into statistical models, we can gain clearer ecological insights. Further, incorporating past experiences into movement models increases our statistical inference. Here, we used 3 years of GPS locations from naïve bison reintroduced into Banff National Park, Canada to evaluate movement patterns and predict dispersal and space use over time. First, we used a hidden Markov model to delineate traveling from encamped states in the empirical data. Next, we isolated these traveling movements and used a step selection function (SSF) and conditional logistic regression framework to identify how bison used the landscape during their movements. The SSF included landscape and environmental variables (e.g., landcover, snow depth), as well as metrics for past experience (i.e., attraction to previously visited areas). Finally, we simulated 5,000 bison, choosing movements based on the coefficients from the SSF, to predict where bison may move within a 3-year time frame. Our SSF model fit the data very well (Spearman Rank 0.96). Simulated bison used a larger area compared with bison actually on the landscape and were predicted to leave the park boundary in some cases as early as 8.5 months. Our work provides critical information for reintroduction programs by better predicting movements of naïve animals over time. Understanding how animals learn their environment and incorporate that knowledge into movement decisions is particularly important for restorative ecology programs where success is often tied to how populations move and settle in new environments.
Integrating telemetry data into mark recapture analysis: case study of false killer whale (Pseudorca crassidens) abundance estimation in Hawaiian watersMonitoring natural populations requires data that can be extremely difficult to collect when the animals are rare, cryptic, or inaccessible. Surveys often only encompass a small portion of a population’s range due to difficult terrain or inclement weather. Thus, to maximize encounters, sampling efforts may be largely opportunistic. The resulting sparse and spatially-biased data may be difficult to model, standardize across years, and incorporate into a management framework. In many monitoring programs, however, there are usually multiple threads of data that, though each may have its own deficiencies, can be synthesized to reveal important ecological processes. Currently, surveys for the insular population of false killer whales (Pseudorca crassidens) around the main Hawaiian islands are almost exclusively conducted on leeward sides of the islands due to sighting and safety concerns. This sampling bias limits the ability to fully assess population abundance and trends of this endangered population. Here, we used 16 years (2000-2015) of a longitudinal photo ID mark-recapture dataset containing 141 known false killer whale individuals along with telemetry data from 43 individuals to fit a quasi-spatial mark-recapture model that uses the information from telemetry data to address the sampling bias. Utilization distributions (UDs) were estimated from each GPS track and then combined into social cluster UDs. We then fit a dynamic factor analysis to the sighting data to mix cluster-level UDs according to individual observation trends. The interaction between these approximated individual UDs and kernel densities of yearly survey efforts was incorporated into a state- space Jolly-Seber population model to estimate abundance of false killer whales around the Main Hawaiian Islands. Our method resulted in more robust and precise abundance estimates than previous mark- recapture analyses on these data. Future accommodation of additional data types, such as passive acoustics, into this framework can allow for integration of disparate datasets collected in monitoring programs to enhance our understanding of elusive populations.Guidelines to validating generalized linear mixed models in Template Model Builder using quantile residuals.Model validation, whether via graphical examination or formal hypothesis tests, is a crucial step in statistical analyses to alert the analyst to potential model misfit. Unlike model selection, where models are compared relative to each other, model validation looks for inadequacies in a single model and helps identify likely causes and thus potential solutions. Generalized linear mixed models (GLMMs) are now ubiquitous in the ecological literature, yet well-established protocols for model validation are lacking compared to generalized linear models. This is partly because Pearson residuals are unreliable for model validation, and the more appropriate quantile residuals are more difficult to calculate and interpret.Here, we review two distinct statistical approaches for quantile residuals: one-step-ahead (OSA) and simulation residuals via DHARMa, both of which are readily available in the popular TMB package. We review the statistical properties, interpretation, and calculation of each method and their variants, including their application in TMB. We test the calibration of p-values from normality tests of residuals using simulation on three examples: a LMM, time series model, and spatial model. We also provide examples of several different types of common mis-specifications in ecology to demonstrate appropriate model validation statistics and test whether the mis-specified models fail validation. In certain cases, simulation residuals were faster to calculate and had good performance, but OSA residuals were better in the multivariate context. Overall, the flexibility of generalized linear mixed models can affect the power needed to detect model mis-specification.
sdmTMB: Fast, flexible, and user-friendly spatial and spatiotemporal generalized linear mixed-effects modelsAnalyzing geostatistical data (spatially referenced observations) is becoming increasingly common in ecology for applications such as species distribution models (SDMs). These data often also include a discrete temporal dimension, such as yearly samples. Computational tools to model spatial and spatiotemporal processes have advanced considerably over the last decade. One major advancement has been the SPDE (Stochastic Partial Differential Equation) approach to enable rapid fitting to large spatial datasets. In this talk, we present a new R package, sdmTMB. The goal of sdmTMB is not to replace functionality in existing packages (e.g., inlabru, VAST, spaMM). Instead, the goal is to provide a user-friendly implementation of SPDE models, with an interface familiar to those who have used lme4 or glmmTMB, but focussing on spatial and spatiotemporal models. We extend generalized linear mixed-effect models (GLMMs) to include the following optional features:SPDE-based spatial random fieldsSPDE-based spatiotemporal random fields that may be independent by year or modeled as random walks or autoregressive processespenalized smooth terms for covariates, using the familiar s() notation from mgcvspatially varying coefficient models (SVCs)time-varying covariates (coefficients modeled as random walks)Estimation is performed in sdmTMB via maximum marginal likelihood, implemented using Template Model Builder (TMB). The sdmTMB package also allows for models to be passed to Stan, allowing for Bayesian estimation. We provide a general overview of the package structure and demonstrate features using examples including Snowy Owl winter irruptions in North America and a dataset describing the distribution of Pacific Cod in British Columbia, Canada. We highlight advantages of using sdmTMB for these classes of models including (1) estimation in TMB is often faster than alternative estimation routines, (2) sdmTMB provides a user-friendly interface that is familiar to many R users, (3) sdmTMB allows for simple out-of- sample model validation, (4) non-stationary processes are easily constructed with a formula interface (time- varying coefficients, spatially varying coefficient models). For analysts fitting dynamic species distribution models to estimate standardized population abundance trends, sdmTMB provides specific functions for performing these calculations.
A semi-spatial integrated population model to assess population dynamics of recovering speciesRecolonizing species exhibit unique population dynamics, namely dispersal to and colonization of new areas, that are important to understand from a conservation and management perspective. Integrated population models (IPMs) have proven useful for making inference about population dynamics by integrating multiple data streams, including data relevant to population state and demographic rates. More recently, spatially explicit integrated population models (SIPMs) have leveraged the power of spatial capture recapture, resulting in a spatially explicit model of population dynamics. SIPMs, however, require information on the spatial observation process to correctly model spatially explicit data. In a recolonizing population of wolves in Washington, USA, we were lacking data on the spatial observation process but wanted to leverage the power of SIPMs to describe the recolonization process, which is critical to recovery. We present a semi-spatial integrated population model, which uses GPS collar and pack count data to estimate survival, reproduction, abundance, and movement rates. There are two components: [1] a matrix population model that governs the population state process and vital rates, and [2] an individual based component that allows movement of individuals and colonization of new areas. Following the identification of potential dispersers, their fate is determined by [1] drawing of a dispersal distance, [2] assignment to the territory of least cost based on an underlying connectivity model, [3] number of wolves at the potential new territory, and [4] a Bernoulli process by which those wolves will stay or go based on an underlying occupancy model. Our semi-spatial IPM can be used to assess population dynamics with a spatial component and determine how management strategies can affect population dynamics and recovery.
Movement analysis of rescued and captive-reared Lesser Flamingos from Kamfers Dam, Kimberley, South Africa, 2019 – 2021Nearly 2000 Lesser Flamingo (Phoeniconaias minor) chicks were rescued from Kamfers Dam, South Africa in January and February 2019 when receding water levels and drought exposed abandoned nests. The dam, located in the semi-arid savannah area north of Kimberley, Northern Cape Province, has supported breeding Lesser Flamingos since 2006 and is one of four breeding localities for the species globally. The rescued birds were hand-reared at accredited Zoo and Aquarium facilities as well as at registered bird rehabilitation centers around South Africa, returned to Kimberley between April and September 2019 for release back into Kamfers Dam. Overall, 614 individuals survived, and 21 birds were fitted with Druid GSM/GPS tracking units. We present results from selected GPS tracking data. Overall dispersal from Kamfers Dam is variable and multi-directional and revealed previously unknown routes of Lesser Flamingos from Kamfers Dam.Multi-state log-normal hidden Markov models (HMMs) were fitted to GPS data from selected tracked birds to understand patterns of movement in relation to time of day, month of the year, altitude and moon phase. A four-state model HMM provided the best fit to the movement data, with the fourth state inferred to represent relocating behaviour. We found strong relationships between the long relocations, and nocturnal flights, altitude and moon phase. The relocating state occurred more frequently during the full moon phase and less regularly during the third quarter. As a first large-scale rescue and release operation of Lesser Flamingos in Africa, it highlighted the scientific and conservation success of such an operation but also the risks of young flamingos to hand-rearing processes and crossing vast arid landscapes during their first long flights.
Improving predictive performance of trait-SDMs by parameterising variation in trait-environment relationships across environmental gradientsTraits modulate species' responses to environmental gradients. By adding trait-environment interaction terms into multi-species distribution models, it is easier to predict rare species’ distributions. Prior work has shown that trait-SDMs built in restricted geographic space may not predict species distributions very well in regions where the environmental conditions differ. This is likely related to varying relationship between traits and environmental variables along an environmental gradient. In this work we examine the generality of trait-environment relationships that underpin trait-SMDs using trait-SDMs fit across 19 biogeographic regions in Southeast Australia. Using a fine-scale occupancy dataset of 100 eucalyptus species and associated leaf, reproductive, and habit traits, we compare the trait-environment interaction parameters across environmental gradients. We demonstrate how incorporating a parameter for the trait-environment relationship along an environmental gradient can be used to improve predictions from region-wide trait- SDMs.
Quantifying long-term changes in southern right whales’ behavioural response to kelp gull micropredation using a latent covariate Markov modelKelp gulls (Larus dominicanus) feed on the skin and blubber of southern right whales (Eubalaena australis) off Península Valdés, Argentina. Attacks are mainly targeted to mother-calf pairs, and they have increased over time. Studies have shown that whales spend more time in energy-demanding behaviours and less time resting in response to kelp gull attacks. These effects on whales’ behaviour could have important conservation implications, given that Península Valdés is a breeding ground with low food availability, where mothers rely mainly on stored energy to sustain lactation. However, short-term studies suggest that whales have learned new ways to cope with attacks, so we aimed to quantify these changes using behaviour and attacks data spanning 24 years. In 1995 and from 2004 to 2018 we visually followed mother-calf pairs, recording their behaviour every 5 minutes (classified as rest, slow travel or high energy behaviours) and the number of kelp gull attacks they received in every interval. We modelled the whales’ behaviour assuming a Markov process where transition probabilities are functions of a latent covariate that represents their disturbance state, which increases when whales are attacked and decreases when they are not, bounded between 0 and 1. Model parameters were allowed to vary among years with a temporal correlation structure. For every year we computed the steady state distribution of the Markov chain fixing the latent covariate at the least and most disturbed values, 0 and 1, and used those distributions as a proxy for the potential effect of kelp gull attacks on whales’ behaviour. In 1995 attacks would have decreased the whales’ rest frequency from 0.49 (undisturbed) to 0.19 (disturbed), while the high energy behaviours frequency would have increased from 0.17 to 0.57. Between years 2010 and 2018 attacks caused smaller changes in behaviour: rest frequency would have decreased from 0.45 to 0.22, and high energy behaviours would have increased from 0.14 to 0.40. In addition, the time to return to pre-attack behaviour was longer in 1995. Our results suggest that kelp gull micropredation still affects whales’ behaviour, but currently, they invest less energy to avoid it than they did in 1995.
Model-based hypothesis testing for multivariate abundance dataEcologists frequently wish to use multivariate abundance data to test hypotheses about ecological communities and their response to experimental treatments or environmental perturbations, currently achieved using resampling methods (e.g. via the mvabund or vegan package, or using PERMANOVA).However, this approach becomes problematic when random effects are desired in the model, e.g. for hierarchical or repeated measures sampling designs, because resampling techniques typically do not extend naturally to the mixed models setting. Here we instead explore a model-based inference approach, using generalised latent variable models fitted via the glmmTMB package in R. The glmmTMB package is an extension of lme4 for mixed modelling, capable of accommodating complex study designs, to which we have added factor analytical functionality (via the rr variance structure) to handle multivariate responses with high dimension.We express the problem of testing for a (multivariate) treatment effect as a test of whether one (or more) variance components is zero, for random effects representing taxon-level treatment effects. Standard tests such as the likelihood ratio and Wald tests are not asymptotically Chi-squared distributed as standard regularity assumptions are not satisfied, because the null value of the variance component is on the boundary of the parameter space. We examine a few strategies for approximating the asymptotic null distribution of the likelihood ratio test and compare their performance to resampling.
Know what you don't know: Embracing uncertainty in hidden Markov modelsEcological hidden Markov models, like capture-recapture and dynamic occupancy models, are widely used to describe ecological state processes that are partially or completely unobserved. Multistate models are often of particular interest when researchers are interested in describing the features of different subcomponents of populations or species. Examples in disease ecology include capture-recapture models that describe survival of infected and uninfected individuals. Traditional multistate models assume that states are correctly assigned upon capture, and multievent models were developed to introduce uncertainty about the observed states. However, state assignment errors can occur at more than one level of detection: in a disease context, errors can arise in the sampling process but also in the diagnostic process that these samples are subjected to. Critically, both false-negative and false-positive errors can occur at both levels of detection. In addition, the true pathogen detection rate is likely to be dependent on pathogen load, which induces heterogeneity which can be modeled. We developed an extended multievent capture-recapture model that accounts for errors at two levels of pathogen detection. We illustrate our model with a capture- recapture dataset of an endangered Australian rainforest frog to investigate its susceptibility of the amphibian chytrid fungus. We show that pathogen detection is highly load-dependent resulting in an average of 63% probability of detecting the fungus on a swab, with a false-positive rate of 5%. Failing to account for these sources of error introduces considerable bias in the parameter estimation, including an underestimation of infection prevalence and overestimation of the frequency of infection state transitions. Our model is readily applied to other hidden Markov models, and we recommend accounting for state assignment errors more generally in multistate models.
Machine Learning and Harmful Algal Blooms: Towards an expert Forecasting, Warning, and Decision-Support Numerical System.Coastal marine ecosystems are evolving significantly in response to anthropogenic pressures. The degradation and restoration trajectories do not always correspond to the expected patterns, making management approaches extremely challenging. Maintaining ecosystem goods and services is strongly related to phytoplankton biomass, abundance and diversity because of their importance on marine food webs (energy transfer). However, understanding phytoplankton dynamics requires recognizing the interactions between environmental (climate, light, nutrients, etc.) and biological (consumption, sedimentation, lysis, etc.) regulations, thus involving approaches at different scales (long vs. short term, low vs. high frequency, regional vs. global scale). Until now, such multi-scale, multi-parameter approaches are rare, despite their ability to extract the most essential information. In this context, our project aims to characterize the dynamics of coastal environments. In particular, we will focus on phytoplankton dynamics (including HAB) in response to pressures at various temporal and spatial scales, from recurrent to extreme events. This will help us understand the processes associated with HABs, prioritize a set of controlling factors, and define indicators to assess environmental quality status. Our research will thus integrate Machine Learning methods into a meta-program, allowing us to (i) optimize multi-source and multi-scale monitoring databases through the implementation of a data completion method based on elastic matching (Dynamic Time Warping), and (ii) optimally define the environmental statuses and build a learning base through a deep approach (Multi-level Spectral Clustering M-SC).This will pave the way for the development of an Expert Forecasting, Warning, and Decision-Support System. M-SC will aid in better defining the main environmental conditions that cause HAB. Experts should be able to label these conditions, and improve the settings of an unsupervised Hidden Markov Model (transition probabilities), and its ability to characterize the transitional dynamics from one environmental condition to another. Simultaneously, a semi-supervised approach, which is a mix of deep unsupervised and supervised approaches, will allow us to anticipate the evolution of this system by taking into consideration various phytoplankton bloom situations.
Towards an open-access platform offering resources to teach and learn Ecological StatisticsThe diversity of statistical approaches developed and applied in ecology are constantly increasing and evolving. In the current open-access era, most of these approaches are now accessible for researchers to apply them relatively easily to their own researches, thanks to the numerous resources that are now openly available online. Such resources include pdf documents and books providing detailed examples with coding, free online courses and exercises, YouTube channels and other freely available videos, specialised group discussions and lists, etc. These resources are allowing researchers to learn basic and advanced programming and statistical technics. Our community is definitely benefiting from these remarkable progresses. Still, finding our way in this labyrinth of resources can be quite chaotic, and keeping up to date with the evolution of so many approaches can be challenging. We therefore started gathering and filtering these resources to build a webpage that is listing and linking available resources within various thematic in Ecological Statistics. The platform is intended for both educators and researchers, from very beginners to advanced users. Our short-term goal is to attract potential contributors and to promote this platform to potential users. We will therefore present the platform and how it can be used, and we will explain how researchers that are interested can contribute. Our long-term goal is to gather enough contributors so that keeping the platform up to date and dynamic can be achieved with a low amount of time invested per person. We believe this platform can become a key tool for researchers and educators in our field, especially if a diversity of experts in our community is willing to contributes.
A censored likelihood approach for estimating hook-competition-adjusted relative abundance indices using longline fishing dataMonitoring and identifying changes in the population abundance of species is essential for the successful management of fisheries. Estimates of abundance trends of many demersal fish species are frequently made using data collected from fishery-independent longline surveys. These estimates are used as inputs for formal stock assessments to advise fisheries managers on harvest levels. It has long been known that catch-per-unit effort-based (CPUE-based) estimators of relative abundance applied to longline survey data can be severely biased due to numerous issues. These include inter- and intra-species hook-competition effects, gear-saturation effects, bait effects, and hook-type effects. Unfortunately, survey design cannot eliminate all these biases. Numerous instantaneous catch-rate-based (ICR-based) estimators of relative abundance have been put forward with the aim of better controlling for the biasing effects of gear saturation and hook competition. These estimators model the bait removal times from the actively fishing hooks as independent random variables with constant species-specific rates. However, in experimental settings, doubt has been cast on many of the strong assumptions that are required of these ICR-based methods to accurately infer relative abundance.We present results from our comprehensive simulation study that confirms that both the CPUE-based and ICR-based estimators suffer from large biases and poor nominal coverage levels in many realistic settings. Then, we develop a new estimator of relative abundance, based on a statistical censored likelihood approach. Results from the simulation study confirm that the new censored likelihood estimator greatly outperforms both the CPUE-based and ICR-based estimators across all the simulation settings tested with respect to the measures of bias, root-mean-square error, and nominal coverage levels. The censored likelihood estimator is shown to be highly robust to model mis-specification, and easy to fit within popular and existing statistical packages. Finally, we apply our estimator to data on example species (Pacific Halibut and Yelloweye Rockfish) from longline surveys conducted by the International Pacific Halibut Commission and compare the results with existing estimators.
Are they fishing or not? Effect of time interval and method on estimated fishing effort in a bivalve dredge and octopus traps small scale fisheries in PortugalSmall scale fisheries (SSF, boats < 12 m) represent 90% of worldwide fisheries and 84% of the EU fleet,providing direct employment for ≈100,000 people in the EU. These are a fundamental support for coastal communities, providing nutritional support, jobs and livelihoods, having also an important cultural heritage. The identification of the areas where the fishing operations are occurring and its intensity, is therefore, crucial for marine biodiversity conservation, spatial planning and fisheries management. This information are thus crucial to preserve and defend these important fisheries in the future, which are currently declining.Recent EU legislation will oblige SSF boats to be tracked, but unlike in most large scale fisheries (LSF) where VMS data has been considered to be sufficient to determine fishing effort, the SSF fisheries require very high spatio-temporal resolution of the location data (i.e. secs-mins). In the current work we use an expert validated data set sampled from four SSF fisheries in Portugal (three areas of a bivalve dredge fleet and one octopus fishery using traps) that were equipped with GPS sensors to record the spatio-temporal position every 30 secs. Using these boat tracks, different statistical approaches can then be applied to discriminate between fishing from traveling periods (or others). Fishing periods are used to produce gridded surfaces of spatio-temporal estimates of fishing effort (fishing intensity) and the respective indicators. In the current work the tracking data was used to test and validate the effect of 1) data pre-processing; 2) statisticalmethods used to estimate ‘fishing events’ (i.e. Gaussian Mixture models); 3) temporal resolution (do we require regular 30 secs time intervals, or 5 min would be ok?) on 1) fishing effort indicators and 2) gridded fishing effort maps. Further, a new simple statistical approach was developed specifically for this data set and compared with other methods. The results of this work will be used to implement a system to monitor Portuguese SSF in Portugal, which has the largest marine area in the EU.
A generic solution to testing model fit in piecewise path models with correlated errors given non-normality and non-linearityPath modelling has become an indispensable tool for ecologists to understand and test hypotheses about the causal dependency between measured variables. Classical path modelling, involving only observed variables, can also incorporate so-called correlated errors, which are associations between pairs of observed variables resulting from a common latent cause. Classical path modelling assumes independent measurements, linear relationships and normally distributed variables. However, ecological data is oftentimes not normally distributed, non-linear, and clustered in time or space, limiting the application and reliability of inferences made from classical path analysis. These assumptions can be relaxed for path models that do not include correlated errors via d-sep tests by decomposing the joint probability of the variables in the path model into the product of univariate distributions conditional on their causes.However, for variables having correlated errors such a decomposition is not possible via d-separation. Our contribution, which uses m-separation of a mixed acyclic graph, is twofold. First, we provide a decomposition of observed variables of the causal model into smaller, independent sets. Second, we use copulas to model the correlated errors between non-normally distributed variables. We illustrate the technique with a case study and discuss the advantages of this technique. One major advantage of this technique is that model selection techniques based on maximum likelihood, such as AIC, can be used to select among competing models.
An Analytical Solution for Optimising Multi-species Detection SurveysWhen undertaking surveillance for multiple species the probability of detecting each species at a site for a given level of survey effort is rarely 1. As such, there is a trade-off between the number of sites to survey, and the survey effort per site. Conservation budgets are limited and inherent costs of surveying need to be considered to ensure that survey design is optimal to meet required objectives. These costs can be simplified into two categories, site establishment costs and the cost of visiting, surveying or processing a site after establishment.Here we examine a scenario in which s species occupy a fraction of the possible survey sites (?_i) and there is imperfect detection of the species during each survey when a species occupies a site (p_i). The establishment of a site has a fixed cost (c) and surveying a site entails a cost (t). The cost of establishing and surveying is constrained by the total survey budget available (B).We show that the expected number of sites with detections for s species is maximised by visiting the site with a particular survey effort (v) and that this only depends on s, the ratio between c & t and q_i's. This general analytical solution allows for optimal surveillance effort for multi-species studies and ensures researchers are able to allocate their survey effort to maximise the detection of species across multiple sites.To illustrate the application of the method we apply this to a multi-species surveillance program which monitored two species of forest owls and four arboreal marsupials.
SPEDE-sampler: An R Shiny application to assess how methodological choices and taxon-sampling may affect DNA-based Generalised Mixed Yule Coalescent (GMYC) species delimitationSpecies delimitation tools are vital to taxonomy and the discovery of new species. These tools can make use of genetic data to estimate species boundaries, where one of the most widely-used methods is the Generalized Mixed Yule Coalescent (GMYC) model. Performance estimates of the GMYC are predominantly based on results from simulated datasets, where assumptions about the underlying statistical properties are not violated. However, GMYC performance on real-world data where model and data assumptions are likely violated remains largely unknown. In this paper, we present “SPEDE-sampler", a user-friendly R Shiny application that assesses the effect of computational and methodological choices, in combination with sampling effects, on the GMYC model using empirical datasets. The application can be used across disciplines and taxonomic groups, and its usage does not require previous coding experience due to its interactive graphical user interface. SPEDE-sampler randomly resamples a desired percentage of DNA sequences in a multiple sequence alignment file, optionally guided by user-defined groups (e.g. morphospecies or ecospecies), and produces input files for BEAST analyses. The resulting BEAST phylogenies are then used to assess the effect that (1) sample size and geographic sampling scale, (2) BEAST and GMYC parameters (e.g. prior settings and rate distributions, clock model, GMYC single vs multiple threshold approach), and (3) singletons has on GMYC output. The optional user-defined groups can be compared to GMYC species estimates to calculate percentage match scores between traditional morphological taxonomy and DNA-based taxonomic methods. Additionally, predefined groups that contribute to inflated species richness estimates are identified by SPEDE-sampler, allowing for further investigation of potential cryptic species or population structure within those groups. The application allows the user to download all generated data files, as well as associated customisable graphics in a variety of image formats. The application is open-source, and is available for download on GitHub (https://github.com/clarkevansteenderen/spede_sampler_R) with installation instructions and a fully- worked example.
Bioeconomic Model of Sardina pilchardus, Engraulis encrasicolus andXiphias gladius with tide effectsThe main objective of this work is the study of the effects of high tides and low tides on fishing effort, catches as well as profits in a bioeconomic model of populations of Sardina pilchardus, Engraulis encrasicolus and Xiphias gladius in Moroccan areas. To achieve this objective, we studied the stability of the equilibrium points of our biological model then we added in our model the effect of the tides in the fishing effort which maximizes the profits of the fishermen under the constraint of the conservation of the biodiversity of these marine species using the generalized Nash equilibrium in the resolution of the bioeconomic model. As results, we were able to give the best fishing times according to the tides of each month of the whole year which will allow us to achieve better yields. Hence the importance of introducing the effect of high and low tides in bioeconomic models
Spatially explicit population viability analysis: a novel model applied to Mojave desert tortoises in the eastern Mojave desertMojave desert tortoises (Gopherus agassizii) are long-lived reptiles whose populations are threatened by numerous threats that vary markedly over the species’ range. We developed a spatially explicit population viability analysis for the species across a >25 000 km2 area in the eastern Mojave desert. We used a novel technique for population viability analysis, a hierarchical mixed-regressive spatial autoregressive model, to estimate demographic rates and obtain rates of population change and then we forecasted probabilities of quasi-extirpation across the analysis area. Mean estimates of annual survival for juvenile tortoises varied geographically from 0.49 to 0.98 (overall 0.79, 95% CrI 0.39-0.97), whereas annual survival of adults was generally higher and less variable, ranging from 0.70 to 0.97 (0.86, 0.74-0.94). The rate at which juveniles transitioned to adults ranged from 0.09 to 0.11 (overall 0.09, 0.06-0.14). Juvenile survival increased asdistance to the nearest city increased (standardized ??? = 0.30, -0.18 – 0.87), but there was no evidence of a similar pattern in adult survival (-0.04, -0.20 – 0.13) or juvenile-to-adult transition rate (0.03, -0.23 – 0.27). There was appreciable geographic variation in the estimated rate of population change (?), which ranged from 0.89 to 1.18 (mean 1.02). Population viability of Mojave desert tortoise populations was bimodal, with most southern areas of the distribution having low (< 0.1) and most central areas having high (> 0.9) probabilities of quasi-extirpation. Independent line-distance and telemetry studies following the end of our sampling period corroborated our predictions of local population increases or declines. For desert tortoises, conservation actions are needed across much of the analysis area, and would be most beneficial when directed to improve juvenile survival, especially from the central portion of the analysis area extending to the northwest.
The potential of Capture Mark Recapture models for the study of life- history traits of mosquitoesThrough a capture-mark-recapture (CMR) longitudinal experiment, we aim to evaluate the adaptation of mosquito vectors to environmental modifications associated with global change. It is important to evaluate their life-history traits change, influencing vectorial capacity, in order to predict more accurately the epidemiological consequences of niche expansions. The procedure uses environmental DNA to identify individually mosquito larvae. This raises two difficulties for the analysis which are the misidentifications due to poor eDNA and the small recapture rate due to the cumbersomeness of the protocol coupled with big population size.To deal with the misidentifications, we examine the latent multinomial model (LMM) developed by Link et al (2011) and extended in Schofield & Bonner (2015) and in Bonner et al (2016). It uses latent histories in which the misidentifications are known. We evaluated the model on different scenarios. Simulations were made to understand the limits of the model and to define an efficient fieldwork protocol. The lack of information with few recaptures being the main problem we have to deal with, we are working on adding information through informative priors and through the observation of the different larvae stages in the data.For capture rates between 0.1 and 0.4, identification rates between 0.8 and 0.9, and 5 to 9 sampling occasions, we showed that the biases of the model estimates are sensitive to the capture rate and to the number of sampling occasion. The biases tend to be reduced when the identification rate is increased.There is a better decrease of the bias by augmenting the capture effort or the number of occasions rather than the identification effort. All these considerations will help in designing an efficient fieldwork, taking into account the biology of mosquitoes.
Using remote-sensing variables to predict fine-scale arthropod distributions across a forested landscapeThe US Forest Service is charged with achieving ‘sustainable multiple-use management’ to promote “the health, productivity, diversity, and beauty of forests and associated lands.” In short, US forests should produce timber, promote recreation, and protect biodiversity. This multiple-use mandate requires, as an input to decision-making, distribution maps of large numbers of species, to identify areas of high conservation value that should be protected. To generate these maps efficiently, we have designed a pipeline to predict the distribution of arthropod communities from DNA-based data.We collected 121 Malaise-trap samples from 89 sample sites in and around the HJ Andrews Experimental Forest, Oregon. We shotgun-sequenced each sample and used Kelpie software to carry out in-silico PCR of the COI DNA barcode gene (BF3BR2 primer) to extract 889 Operational Taxonomic Units (OTU), which we filtered to 190 OTUs with ≥6 incidences. The resulting sample by species table was paired with Landsat, Lidar, and human-activity environmental covariates in a joint species distribution model. We used the sjSDM R package to apply a deep neural network (DNN) on the environmental covariates, paired with a linear model on spatial position and a species-species correlation matrix to direct model fitting via regularization. Model tuning was carried out using cross-validation, and we analyzed variable importance with explainable AI (xAI).The fitted model has a mean explanatory AUC of 0.82, and a mean predictive AUC of 0.66. xAI found that elevation and roads are most frequently the most important covariate, although 28 covariates in total were the most important for at least one species. We interpolated the model predictions for the 87 best- performing species (AUCpredictive > 0.7) across the 384 km2 study area to generate a continuousbiodiversity map, subdivided the landscape, and calculated each site’s irreplaceability value, a measure of conservation value. Site irreplaceability is negatively correlated with elevation and topographic position index.We show that it is possible to efficiently fit a joint species distribution model with reasonable predictive performance on large numbers of data-poor species. Our pipeline can generate informative inputs to land- use decision-making and can be scaled up to larger areas.
Evaluation of Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Pollution from the HMS Royal Oak Shipwreck and Effects on Sediment Microbial Community StructureOn the 14th October 1939, six weeks after the start of World War II, the British battleship HMS Royal Oak was torpedoed by a submarine and sank to the bottom of Scapa Flow (Orkney Islands, Scotland UK). Given many shipwrecks contain oil products (which include polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs), many of which are toxic, carcinogenic, and persist in the environment) there is a lack of studies investigating the release of oil from shipwrecks. HMS Royal Oak sank with approximately 3,000 tonnes of fuel oil on board and was observed to leak oil in the 1960s and 1990s; currently, it is estimated to hold 697 tonnes of fuel oil. Whilst any visible oil leakage from HMS Royal Oak in Scapa Flow has subsided, it is unknown whether there is a legacy of hydrocarbon contamination in the sediments. This study evaluated any potential effect of oil released from the shipwreck HMS Royal Oak on the surrounding seabed. Sediments were analysed, over a17.5 cm depth profile, along four 50 – 950 m transects (N,E,S,W) away from the shipwreck. Analysis of PAHs, via gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, revealed low concentrations (205.91 ± 50.15 µg kg-1 of dry sediment), which did not significantly differ with either distance from the shipwreck nor sediment depth. PAH concentrations were well below the Effects-Range Low for the OSPAR (Oslo/Paris convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic) maritime area. Multiple models were tested for the their ability to source type environmental PAHs. The average Pyrogenic Index, in sediments around HMS Royal Oak, was 1.06 (± 0.34), indicating PAHs were pyrogenic rather than petrogenic. A second line of investigation involved the analysis of sediment microbiomes, via DNA sequencing, which revealed no significant differences in bacterial community structure with distance from the shipwreck. Sediments contained extremely low levels of obligate hydrocarbonoclastic bacteria (OHCB; 0.21% ± 0.54%); bacteria capable of attenuating hydrocarbons (PAHs) from the environment. Both lines of evidence suggest, at the time of sampling, sampled sediments are not currently being impacted by petrogenic hydrocarbons and show no long-term impact by previous oil-spills from HMS Royal Oak.
Matching to account for confounded observational data: an example using potential vessel disturbance to walrusesMatching is rarely used in wildlife studies but often used in human social, health, and behavioral sciences to make causal inference based on observational data, which are inherently confounded. We demonstrate use of matching on confounded observational wildlife data by testing for an effect of nearby vessels on walrus behavior (effect of vessels ≤17 km from a walrus on proportions of time spent feeding, resting and swimming). An example of confounding in this study is nearby sea ice. Walruses are less likely to be exposed to vessels in icy waters than open waters because most vessels avoid ice. However, walruses use ice as a resting platform. As a result, not correctly accounting for the confounding effect of ice could make it appear that walruses rest less when vessels are nearby even if it is only due to lack of ice as a resting platform.Correct use of matching balances values of confounders in exposed and unexposed groups, obviating the need to obtain correct causal regression relationships of the effect of interest (vessel exposure) and all confounders (sea ice and other environmental variables) on the response variable (walrus behavior), across the entire range of confounder values that occur in the data. This is crucial because correct causal relationships are not reliably identified by the most parsimonious model. Our matching retained all vessel- exposed observations, and matched to them the unexposed observations, obtaining an effect of exposure standardized to the exposed. In other words, we estimated effect of vessel exposure on walrus behaviors under environmental conditions in which walruses are exposed to vessels. Thus, our matching limited the scope of inference to conditions observed with vessel exposure to obtain the most sensitive, unbiased possible inference under those conditions. In this talk, we define and outline useful details of matching techniques, such as propensity scores as a matching criterion and checking data balance to evaluate success of the matching procedure. Ultimately, we did not detect an effect of vessel exposure on walrus behavior; more exposures to vessels at closer distances are needed to further address this question.
Stability criteria of complex ecological networksStability of large ecological systems has been a focus of theoretical ecology for more than forty years. Through qualitative analysis, ecologists seek to develop stability criteria for biodiversity maintenance in communities. Dispersal and density dependence have been well studied in the field but their contribution to stability is still unclear. Most inference were done using rather simple models, thus it remains to be seen how model realism, e.g., by considering nonlinear population growth and functional response, could affect stability. Following systems stability analysis, we here develop stability criteria for metacommunities with predator-prey interaction and provide numerical demonstrations for the derived criteria for such bipartite ecological networks. We demonstrate how dispersal and density dependence jointly affect the stability of metacommunities by way of eigenvalue distributions in the complex plane. We further highlight how a more realistic model could affect the stability criteria. This is done by considering the Holling type II functional response as a key factor in the trophic interactions. We investigate these factors by enumerating basic dynamical properties that bring a clear understanding on how stability of large antagonistic ecological networks could be improved. We found that both dispersal and density dependence of species were stabilising while nonlinear functional response destabilising the system. Our results highlight that metacommunities with antagonistic interactions are more stable than randomly assembled well-mixed communities.
Modelling allometric variation of foreleg length in oil beesPollinators often have exaggerated traits that are thought to have co-evolved with traits of the flowers they visit. One spectacular example is the elongated forelegs that Rediviva bees use to collect oil from flowers with long spurs. We examined the ecological basis of variation in foreleg length among 26 Rediviva species in South Africa and to what extent underlying developmental constraints might have played a role in their evolution. We adapted linear mixed effects models for estimating the allometric scaling relationships between foreleg length and body size within species (static allometry) and between species (evolutionary allometry), while accounting for phylogenetic relatedness among species. We found low variation in static allometric slopes suggesting that body size constrained the evolution in leg length in similar ways across species. However, the static allometric intercept varied among species and part of this variance was explained by the spur length of the species-specific host flowers. Our analysis indicates that spur length was a selective force shaping the foreleg length in these bees but that variation in leg length was constrained by variation in body size within species. We found no evidence for phylogenetic constraints on the variation of leg length. Overall, our study provides new insights on how phenotypic evolution in the forelegs of oil- collecting bees is related to the variability of the allometric intercept and adaptation to host plants.
Using spatial capture-recapture methods to establish baseline abundance and density estimates of snow leopard in western Himalaya NepalReliable estimates of animal abundance and density are central to species conservation. For snow leopard Panthera uncia, a large mammalian carnivore of Asian high mountains, lack of reliable estimates of its population status has been a key limiting factor for effective conservation planning. In fact, merely 2 % of its distribution range has been surveyed adequately for its population state variables, which highlights both uncertainty over its estimated global population status and the need for more rigorous field-based assessments. We obtained the first-ever baseline estimate of the abundance and density of snow leopards in Shey Phoksundo National Park, Nepal. We deployed a total of 65 camera traps (Model HC550; Reonyx Inc, and Cuddeback IR) at 62 stations in the two study sites-Upper Dolpa and Lower Dolpa over an area of approximately 1000 km2 from November 2017 through April 2018. The spatial capture-recapture history of 23 unique snow leopards was prepared for the first 90 sampling occasions and included for analysis to adhere to the closure assumption. Spatially explicit capture-recapture analysis of camera trapping data showed snow leopard density of 1.24 (95% CI 0.58–2.54) and 2.51 (95% CI 1.36–4.60) adults per 100 square kilometers in Lower and Upper Dolpa, respectively. Overall, this study established reliable estimates of snow leopard abundance and density for Nepal’s Shey Phoksundo National Park, which in addition to serving as a useful baseline measure for future monitoring has immediate implications for park level conservation planning.
inlabruSDMs: an R Package to Facilitate the Modeling of Integrated Species Distribution ModelsData integration of disparate datasets is a rapidly growing research area in the field of quantitative ecology due to both the rise in species’ occurrence data, as well as the proven statistical benefits of using such methods. However, the general tools and software to construct integrated species distribution models from data obtained from a variety of sampling procedures is lacking. We present the R package, inlabruSDMs: an easy to use package which aims to facilitate the construction of marked integrated species distribution models, by using the integrated nested Laplace approximation methodology to approximate the model. The package is illustrated through a case study studying the relationship between the underlying environment and the distribution of three Warblers, using data obtained from both citizen science records and formal bird sighting surveys obtained across Pennsylvania state.
Evaluating camera trap-based abundance estimators for unmarked populationsObtaining reliable population abundance or density estimates is crucial to wildlife conservation and management, yet is challenging and costly to attain. Camera traps have emerged as a popular tool to monitor multiple animal species at relatively low cost, for which several methods have been developed to estimate abundance when animals are not individually identifiable (i.e., unmarked populations). However, it remains unclear which method can be trusted to provide accurate abundance estimates and under what conditions. Here, we evaluate and compare the performance of three methods applicable to camera trap data under a common simulation: Random Encounter Model (REM), Random Encounter and Staying Time (REST) and Spatial Count (SC). We test the abundance estimator performance under scenarios spanning a wide range of population densities and home-range sizes, varying camera trap effort and habitat-driven movement. Results will be used to guide the application of these estimators on wild populations.
Score tests: better than sliced breadScore tests are a convenient method for selecting between two nested models. They are often seen as more convenient than alternatives such as Wald tests and likelihood ratio tests as they only require a fit to be obtained for the simpler of the two models being considered. The more complicated model requires a computation of the likelihood and its derivative, but no optimisation is required. Therefore, score tests are a particularly attractive option for modern capture-recapture models, which can be highly time-consuming and challenging to fit. For example, some spatial capture-recapture models require several minutes for just one likelihood evaluation. The score test framework enables the researcher to select just one such model for eventual fitting. This framework has been extensively described in McCrea and Morgan (2011) and Catchpole and Morgan (1996).Traditionally, the challenge of computing the derivative of the likelihood for complex models has meant that score tests have been underutilised. The development of TMB (Template Model Builder) means that automatic differentiation can be harnessed to greatly reduce the challenge of such computation, enhancing the accessibility of score tests. The speed and accuracy with which models can be fitted using TMB means that it also increases the scope and stability of score tests, as it becomes possible to use the estimated expected information matrix to calculate score test statistics. Negative score statistics no longer present barriers to implementing score tests. We will explore the utility of TMB as a vehicle for model selection testing within the score test framework.
bayesnec: An R Package for C-R Modelling and Estimation of No-Effect- Concentration thresholdsConcentration-response (C-R) modelling is fundamental to assessing toxicity and deriving toxicity thresholds used in the risk assessments. Estimates of uncertainty in parameters and derived thresholds are critical to effective integration in risk assessment and formal decision frameworks. Bayesian methods that allow robust quantification of uncertainty with intuitive and direct probabilistic meaning provide a credible alternative to more traditional (Frequentist) approaches. However, Bayesian model fitting can be difficult to automate across a broad range of scenarios, particularly with respect to the identification of prior distributions and initial values. The bayesnec package in R has been developed to fit concentration(dose) - response curves (C-R) to toxicity data for the purpose of deriving No-Effect-Concentration (NEC), No- Significant-Effect-Concentration (NSEC), and Effect-Concentration (of specified percentage ‘x,’ ECx) thresholds from non-linear models using Bayesian MCMC fitting methods via brms and stan. In bayesnec it is possible to fit a single model, custom model-set, specific model-set or all of the available models. When multiple models are specified the bnec function returns a model weighted average estimate of predicted posterior values. A range of support functions and methods is also included to work with the returned single, or multi- model objects that allow extraction of raw, or model averaged predicted, ECx, NEC and NSEC values and to interrogate the fitted model or model-set. The statistical methods used ensure uncertainty in derived threshold values can be robustly quantified, including individual model fit and model selection uncertainty. This presentation will provide an overview of the package and a demonstration of its features using real examples.
Improving ecological clustering with UMAP and HDBSCAN: an application to the Reef Life Survey datasetsClustering, i.e. defining groups of similar objects, is a central task of ecology in order to simplify and structure high-dimensional observations of nature’s complexity. Clustering methods are fundamental in taxonomy and phylogeny are at the core of the definition of habitat typologies, of biogeographical regions and functional groups, and of the identification of structures in ecological networks, for example. Yet the very definition of a cluster is a complex issue, especially when dealing with high-dimensional data, as is often the case in ecology. This is why special attention must be paid to the choice of the clustering pipeline.Among the long list of clustering methods that exist, popular ones in ecology, like K-Means or Ward's hierarchical classification, have some limitations: they can only identify spherical shaped clusters are sensitive to outliers cannot distinguish between core cluster members and noisy observations (e.g. transition between typologies). Recently developed clustering approaches can potentially overcome these limitations.Here we present an application of a clustering pipeline based on a non-linear reduction dimension technique, UMAP, and on the density-based clustering algorithm HDBSCAN on the Reef Life Survey data. This participatory science program surveys the fauna and habitat of coral and rocky reef ecosystems all around the world. Based on more than 7000 underwater diver-based visual censuses across 40 countries, we optimize clustering pipeline for 3 data types : habitat, benthic fauna, fish fauna. UMAP + HDBSCAN often outperform classical approaches. Furthermore, we used UMAP to integrate the three datasets and provide a combined typology, improving our knowledge of the biogeographical patterns across rocky reefs at a global scale and allowing the delineation of core cluster areas, most representative sites and transition zones. This case study demonstrates the usefulness of integrating non-linear density reduction techniques like UMAP and density-based clustering algorithms like HDBSCAN into the ecologists' toolbox to better understand biodiversity.
GLM for Generalized Linear Misleading? The need for a logistic function with estimated asymptotes to overcome inferential issues of the canonical logit link functions for Bernoulli GLMsThe study of the distribution of species, through presence absence data, is often based on canonical Bernoulli Generalized Linear Models (GLMs) or Generalized Additive Models (GAMs). These models classically involve a logistic function with asymptotes fixed at zero and one. Although functions relaxing this assumption have already been proposed, the impacts of this assumption on inferential properties of estimators have not yet been studied.Through a simulation study, we tested our hypothesis that in cases where the true asymptotes are different from zero and/or one and are approximately reached, the estimated parameters of the model could be strongly biased.In the light of our results, three lessons can be drawn for the analysis of binary data: (i) when using canonical Bernoulli GLMs, the canonical link functions are suboptimal in cases where the asymptotes could be different from 0.0 and/or 1.0 and when they were nearly reached for a substantial proportion of data, inducing, in particular, a significant risk of underestimating the slope; (ii) when using canonical Bernoulli GAMs, the splines do not allow to overcome all the issues related to an improper link function and we can expect an underestimation of the magnitude of the relation at least when the asymptotes are different from0.0 and/or 1.0, that they are almost reached, and when we have two continuous explanatory variables or one irregularly distributed continuous variable; (iii) finally, when using more advanced non-linear functions, the models with estimated asymptote(s) can not only be better than canonical form in terms of predictive capacity but also in terms of inference (estimation of the magnitude of the relationship).
Multi-species population indices for sets of species including rare, disappearing or newly occurring speciesMulti-species indices (MSI) are widely used as ecological indicators and as instruments to inform environmental policies. Many of these indices combine species-specific estimates of relative population sizes using the geometric mean. Because the geometric mean is not defined when values of zero occur, usually only commoner species are included in MSIs and zero values are replaced by a small non-zero value. The latter can exhibit an arbitrary influence on the geometric mean MSI. We show how the compound Poisson and the negative binomial model can be used to obtain an MSI that has similar features to the geometric mean, including weighting halving and doubling of a species’ population equally. These two statistical models can handle zero values in population sizes and thus accommodate newly occurring and temporarily or permanently disappearing species in the MSI. We compare the MSIs obtained by the two statistical models with the geometric mean MSI and measure sensitivity to changes in evenness and to population trends in rare and abundant species. We found that, in contrast to the geometric mean and the negative binomial MSI, the compound Poisson MSI is less sensitive to changes in evenness when total abundance is constant. The compound Poisson model can be influenced more than the other two methods by trends of species showing a low interannual variance. The negative binomial MSI is less sensitive to trends in rare species compared with the other two methods, and similarly sensitive to trends in abundant species as the geometric mean. While the two new MSIs have the advantage that they are not arbitrarily influenced by rare, newly appearing and disappearing species, both do not weight all species equally. We recommend replacing the geometric mean MSI with either compound Poisson or Negative binomial when there are species with a population size of zero in some years having a strong influence on the geometric mean MSI. Further, we recommend providing additional information alongside the MSI, for example, an evenness index in addition the compound Poisson MSI or the number of disappearing and newly occurring species alongside the negative binomial MSI.
Accommodating missing non-detections in presence-only data to estimate abundance by spatial capture-recapture methodsSchemes that collect opportunistic data often generate presence-only (PO) data, potentially causing biases in the estimation of abundance or distribution. A possible solution is to use supplementary information to predict where searching with non-detection might have been likely.We used data from a spatial-capture-recapture (SCR) study of plains zebra (Equus quagga), Telperion Nature Reserve, South Africa, to compare 5 different analyses to estimate population abundance. We generated detections by driving a set route daily over 10 days, photographing zebras to identify individuals, and recording the locations of encounters, sighting distances and the travel path of the survey team.Concurrently, we recorded encounters with non-target species blue wildebeest (Connochaetes taurinus), common eland (Taurotragus oryx) and red hartebeest (Alcelaphus buselaphus caama).“Search-path” analysis (1) associated detections with locations along the search path and described the detection process using a hazard function, producing an estimate of 1123 (95% CRI: 993, 1268) animals. For analyses 2–5, we divided the study area into a grid of 1-km cells and treated the centroids as detectors whose locations were associated with detections or non-detections, and each used a different approach to define active cells or detectors (those associated with detections or non-detections) plus a half-normal model to describe the observation process. “Search-path-grid” analysis (2) defined active cells by thelocation of the search path and estimated abundance at 808 (723, 887). “PO-grid” analysis (3) used zebra detections alone and estimated 1000 (885, 1112) animals. “PO-roads-grid” analysis (4) used locations of tourist vehicle routes for non-detections and estimated abundance at 691 (628, 765). “PO-nontarget-grid” analysis (5) used locations of the non-target species as non-detections and estimated 992 (876, 1132) zebras.All methods that used the grid approach produced abundance estimates that were lower than for the search-path analysis, sometimes by a substantial amount. Further work with data simulation will be necessary to compare the degree of bias between the methods. Such studies can inform the use of PO data in SCR estimation, particularly in the context of projects that use opportunistically-collected data.
The role of road infrastructure in driving land cover patterns in South AfricaMajor planned road infrastructure developments are likely to bring significant changes to natural ecosystems in SSA, most often via land use and landcover change. This is because they provide access to markets, economic opportunities and previously hard to access habitats, all of which incentivize landscape transformation processes. We use South Africa as a case study to identify land cover patterns associated with mobility and access roads, and important socio-economic and biophysical modifiers of these patterns.We processed the 2020 South African national land cover dataset (20m-by-20m), to generate a new 6km- by-6km dataset with app. 30000 cells, each containing information on the proportion of natural and non- natural cover within it. Road-related predictor variables, along with other biophysical, demographic, socio- economic variables, were generated and aggregated to this common resolution for further analysis. We used Gradient Boosted Regression Tree (GBM) machine learning models to identify the main variables that explain land cover patterns in SA. We also fitted gradient boost regression tree models to nine individual biomes in the country: Grassland, Savanna, Fynbos, Nama-karoo, Succulent-karoo, Indian Ocean Coastal Belt, Desert, Albany Thicket and Forest. Those features with greatest explanatory power were used in further analysis (partial-dependence plots) to understand the interactions between important drivers.From our preliminary analyses, using the national scale model, some of the most important predictors of natural cover were (in order of importance), rainfall, topographic complexity, GDP, population density and road density (both mobility and access road types). Most of these were also important predictors of natural cover in different biomes, but their relative importance varied. Furthermore, in some biomes (such as Fynbos) other variables, like distance to a protected area, were more important for explaining patterns.Further work will be done to identify the drivers of non-natural land uses as well as the main land use transitions observed between 1990 and 2020.
A Tweedie Markov process and its application in fisheries stock assessmentIn fisheries and ecological research data frequently occur (e.g., fisheries survey indices) that are distributed continuously along the positive real axis but with a finite point mass at zero. Hurdle models such as the delta-gamma model are popular in dealing with such zero-inflated continuous data. However, some research indicates that the Tweedie distribution is more robust than hurdle models to variable sampling conditions. The Tweedie distribution is versatile and includes a wide spectrum of important statistical distributions such as the normal, Poisson, compound Poisson-gamma, gamma, and Inverse Gaussian distributions. There is also the Tweedie Convergence Theorem which says that a wide range of data types converge to the Tweedie distribution. All these good properties make the Tweedie distribution promising in fisheries and ecological modeling. However, the Tweedie dispersion relationship is not general enough to cover some important dispersion types such as quadratic dispersion, and so far there is no Tweedie AR(1) model (autoregressive model of order 1), which limit the application of the Tweedie distribution. The latter is particularly important for spatiotemporal modeling. In this research we solve these issues by extending the Tweedie distribution to accommodate more dispersion relationships, and we propose a Tweedie Markov process with the AR(1) autocorrelation structure. We further study the inference performance of this new approach with extensive simulation studies, and apply it to analyzing survey data of juvenile Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) off Newfoundland and Labrador with a comparison to the popular Gaussian model to demonstrate the Tweedie advantages.
Exploring the use of INLA in Modelling Animal MovementMany models of animal movement fail to represent dynamic contextual information (such as spatiotemporal rasters of environmental variables) at the same fine temporal resolution as telemetry data, creating a mismatch between scales of behavioural and environmental information. However, representing large amounts of spatiotemporal data incurs a significant computational cost. Integrated Nested Laplace Approximation (INLA) methodology may provide a base framework for creating complex, context-aware models of animal movement in a computationally efficient way. INLA is a method for fast, approximate Bayesian inference which can be used to fit a range of spatial and spatiotemporal models. The Bayesian nature of the method allows for the inclusion of prior knowledge, creating informed models for specialist systems, as well as emphasising uncertainty in inference and predictions; a vital feature for informing conservation and management strategies. In the R software packages associated with this method, INLA and inlabru, spatiotemporal data can be modelled as a function of environmental variables as well as other fixed and random effects in an additive linear predictor.Gaussian Markov Random Fields (GMRFs) are used to account for spatiotemporal correlation structures in a computationally efficient way – a feature vital to the handling of highly correlated telemetry data. The R package inlabru was developed with realistically complex ecological data structures and observation processes in mind, so may provide a suitable framework to model complicated animal movement data. Here, I reconstruct the likelihoods of common movement modelling approaches within INLA, to assess the feasibility and benefits of using this method for movement modelling. I explore the use of continuous and discrete-time methods in 1 and 2 dimensions. INLA presents an established framework for context-aware, spatiotemporal modelling that can easily be built up through joint modelling structures into a multi-level hierarchical model. Here, I aim to investigate whether the use of the INLA method provides an efficient framework for movement modelling as a basis for creating more complex movement models with improved predictive abilities.
Bayesian abundance distribution of mosquitoes in ecological zones of Ondo State of NigeriaMosquito is a deadly insect that can cause serious health problem to human. Nigeria has been ranked as one of the countries with malaria prevalence in the world. In recent times, Bayesian method has gained popularity in the study of ecology. The major advantage of Bayesian method over classical method is the use of prior information of the situation being modelled.In this work, we considered a Bayesian Generalized Linear Models (BGLM) method of estimation to analyze the malaria prevalence in some ecological zones of Ondo state of Nigeria. Various mosquito larvae were obtained from six different breeding sites in the ecological zones. The breeding sites are; abandoned plastics, puddles, gutters, tyres, tanks, and tree holes. The results of Bayesian method of estimation was then compared to classical method of estimation. The results show that the Bayesian method of estimation outperformed classical method in the analysis of malaria prevalence of ecological zones of Ondo state, Nigeria. However, puddles breeding site gave the highest number of mosquito larvae in the ecological zones. It is recommended that attention should be given to the ecological zone with the highest number of breeding zones and mosquito larva by public health practitioners.
Using co-correspondence analysis (CoCA) to compare biodiversity patterns detected by two seafloor sampling methodsLong-term monitoring of marine benthic communities provides data that are essential for effective marine management. However, monitoring is limited by the difficulty and expense of sampling deep seafloor areas comprehensively enough to represent the whole benthic community. This has led to the development of a wide array of seafloor sampling methods. Consequently, the integration and prioritisation of data collected using different methods remains an area of concern. Demersal research trawling and grab sampling are two methods employed to sample the marine benthos, targeting different habitats and fauna, at different scales and with different sampling efficiencies. The aim of this study is to determine whether these two sampling methods detect different taxonomic and functional diversity patterns. This was explored using research trawl and grab datasets collected from twenty-four pairs of offshore stations within the Southern Benguela Shelf ecoregion on the west coast of South Africa (70 – 600 m) between the years 2009 and 2020.Symmetric co-correspondence analysis (sCoCA) was used to test for patterns among infaunal (collected by grab) and epifaunal (collected by demersal trawl) communities and functional trait assemblages. sCoCA found infaunal assemblage patterns to be highly correlated with epifaunal assemblage patterns across the study area using both taxonomic and traits-based approaches. The predictive form (pCoCA) was used to determine whether taxonomic diversity is an adequate surrogate for functional diversity in the marine benthos. These findings should be considered when including different biological datasets into ecosystem classification and long-term monitoring.
Modeling the prey base of North Pacific right whales on the eastern Bering shelf to gain insight into possible shifting distributions of feeding whalesThe southeastern Bering Sea is the core feeding ground of the critically endangered eastern population of North Pacific right whale (NPRW). Decreasing sea ice in this region is influencing trophic dynamics. NPRWs in this region target the zooplankton Calanus marshallae/glacialis but they could prey on other zooplankton species given their diet in the Gulf of Alaska. Therefore, we constructed a dynamic, state-space joint species distribution model of zooplankton species from the eastern Bering Sea to provide insights into the potential future distribution of feeding whales. The model quantifies how zooplankton species will respond to changing climatic conditions through both direct effects of environment and indirect effects that emerge from environment propagating through the community of interacting species. We modeled the abundance of 26 zooplankton species from annual fall surveys (Aug-Oct; 2006-2016) along the 70-meter isobath of the eastern Bering shelf using temperature, ice, and wind variables. The zooplankton community was best described by density independent growth driven by bottom and surface temperature and movement (immigration/emigration) driven by ice extent. Density independent growth described the majority of variance for all zooplankton species, but the proportion described by movement generally increased with zooplankton size, which we hypothesize reflects transport of larger zooplankton in water masses and high abundance of smaller zooplankton throughout the study region. Species interactions minimally described the data but were most important for small omnivores (< 1,200 micrometers), which we hypothesize reflects the annual fall sampling design and the small omnivore life history strategy of multiple life stages within a season. For NPRW prey, C. marshallae/glacialis showed a strong negative relationship with bottom temperature and strong positive relationship with ice. Other large calanoids like Neocalanus spp. had a strong positive relationship with bottom temperature, possibly due to advection onto the middle shelf during warm periods. Together, our findings support that hydrographic features, annual reseeding, and advection drive the zooplankton community in this region – suggesting that the core feeding ground of NPRW in the Bering Sea will move farther north with the receding ice, possibly outside of the right whale critical habitat, if NPRWs continue preying on C. marshallae/glacialis.
Bayesian analysis of the historical functional linear model with application to air pollution forecastingHistorical functional linear models are used to analyse the relationship between a functional response and a functional predictor whereby only the past or recent past of the predictor process can affect the current outcome. In this work, we develop a Bayesian framework for the analysis of the historical functional linear model with multiple predictors.Different from existing Bayesian approaches to historical functional linear models, our proposed methodology is able to handle multiple functional covariates with noise, measurement error and sparseness. The proposed model utilises the well-established connection between non-parametric smoothing and Bayesian methods to reduce sensitivity to the number of basis functions which are used to model the functional regression coefficients. We implement an efficient MCMC algorithm that uses a Choleski decomposition to sample from high-dimensional Gaussian distributions and takes advantage of the orthogonal properties of the functional principal components used to model the functional covariates. Our extensive simulation study shows substantial improvements in both the recovery of the functional regression surface and the true underlying functional response with higher coverage probabilities when compared to a classical model under which the measurement error is unaccounted for.A major challenge with the collection of environmental data is that they are prone to measurement error, both random and systematic. Hence, our methodology provides a reliable functional data analytic framework for modelling environmental data. A study conducted in Cape Town, South Africa, has shown that there exists significant daily respiratory, cardiovascular and cerebrovascular mortality risk linked to ambient air pollution exposure, which is higher than reported in developed countries. Consequently, our focus is on the application of our method to forecast the level of daily atmospheric pollutants using meteorological information such as hourly records of temperature, humidity and wind speed from data collected by the City of Cape Town, South Africa. The forecasts provided by the proposed method are highly competitive against the functional autoregressive model with exogenous variables of order 1 which is traditionally used for functional time series.
Quantifying uncertainty in home-range overlap: Confidence intervals for the Utilization Distribution Overlap Index (UDOI)Home-range (HR) estimation and HR overlap are of considerable interest in ecological research. Overlap analyses are commonly employed for different purposes, such as assessing the similarity of multiple HR estimates for a single individual or quantifying the degree of space sharing between individuals. The majority of overlap metrics produce a point estimate for overlap with no associated measure of uncertainty for the estimate. A recent advancement in HR estimation, called Autocorrelated KDE (AKDE), has made quantifying uncertainty in overlap possible. AKDE explicitly accounts for autocorrelation in data by first fitting an autocorrelated movement model. Recent work by Winner et al. (2018) leverages uncertainty in the estimated model parameters to produce approximate confidence intervals (CIs) on the Bhattacharyya Coefficient (BC), a pairwise overlap metric with a formal basis in distributional similarity. However, Fieberg and Kochanny's (2005) classic comparative analysis of pairwise overlap metrics suggests that the UDOI, a generalization of Hurlbert's (1978) E / E_uniform statistic, is preferred over the BC for evaluating overlap between individuals when a measure of space sharing is desired, rather than pure distributional similarity. Our work expands the previously developed inferential framework for the BC to include the UDOI by deriving CIs for the two components that comprise the UDOI: the Average Probability of Encounter (APE) and the area of overlap (A?,?). We evaluate the performance of our CIs using simulations and demonstrate their usefulness with an applied example. We further compare these CIs to those obtained by parametric bootstrap and provide recommendations for implementing these intervals in applied ecological research.
On the Role of Spatial Clustering Algorithms in Building Species Distribution Models from Community Science DataThis research discusses opportunities for developments in spatial clustering methods to help leverage broad scale community science data for building species distribution models (SDMs). SDMs are critical tools that inform the science and policy needed to mitigate the impacts of climate change on biodiversity. Community science data span spatial and temporal scales unachievable by expert surveys alone, but they lack the structure imposed in smaller scale studies to allow adjustments for observational biases such as imperfect detection. Spatial clustering algorithms can construct the necessary structure after surveys have occurred, but more work is needed to ensure that they are effective for this purpose. This research focuses on occupancy models and its rigid structure that assumes observations are organized into a set of sites, where each site has one or more visits that satisfy the closure assumption. Existing methods that attempt to group unstructured species observation into sites are either too constrained, leading to an exclusion of useful data, or too lenient, resulting in sites that violate closure. In this research, we formalize this challenge and introduce it as the Site Clustering Problem. We describe the role of spatial clustering for improving upon these existing methods and realizing the potential of large biodiversity datasets to build SDMs.
Multiple-region, N-mixture community models to assess associations of riparian area, fragmentation, and species richnessThe associations of habitat area and fragmentation with species richness long have been major topics within community ecology. The habitat amount hypothesis, that more variability in species richness is explained by the amount of habitat in the sampling area than by the size or isolation of habitat patches, suggests that species richness may not decline as habitat fragmentation increases. We created a novel, multiple-region,N-mixture community model (MNCM) to examine the relations of riparian area and fragmentation with species richness of breeding birds in mountain ranges within the Great Basin, Nevada, USA. Our MNCM accounts for imperfect detection in count data at the survey-point level while allowing comparisons of species richness among regions in which those points are embedded. We used individual canyons within mountain ranges as regions in our model and measured riparian area and the normalized landscape shape index, a metric of fragmentation that is independent of total riparian area. We found that riparian area, but not its fragmentation, was a primary predictor of canyon-level species richness of both riparian obligates and all species. This result is consistent with the habitat amount hypothesis. The relation between riparian area and riparian-obligate species richness was nonlinear: canyons with ≥ 25 ha woody riparian vegetation had relatively high species richness, whereas species richness was considerably lower in canyons with <25 ha. Our MNCM can be used to calculate other metrics of diversity that require abundance estimates. Forexample, Simpson’s evenness of riparian obligate species had a weak negative association with riparian area and was not associated with fragmentation. Projections of future riparian contraction suggested that decreases in species richness are likely to be greatest in canyons that currently have moderate (~10-25 ha) amounts of riparian vegetation. Our results suggest that if a goal of management is to maximize the species richness of breeding birds in montane riparian areas in the Great Basin, it may be more effective to focus on total habitat area than on fragmentation of patches within canyons, and that canyons with at least moderate amounts of riparian vegetation should be prioritized.
A new modelling framework for roost count dataParrots are one of the largest and most threatened bird families. Consequently, there is a need to accurately estimate parrots population sizes/trends to quantify population dynamics and the impacts of different threats, to identify species that require protection, and to develop effective management plans. However, parrot populations are challenging to survey as their behaviors make them difficult to detect or unavailable to count. Roost count data provides an efficient, cost-effective way to monitor parrot populations in comparison to other survey methods, such as capture-mark-recapture, removal or distance sampling as some parrots may nest in elevated cavities in trees or cliffs that are difficult to find, reach, and monitor.Roost count data consists of multiple imperfect counts of the same roost over time, with counts typically collected under different environmental conditions. Motivated by two case studies, we consider models for roost count data to estimate the underlying population size/trend over time. We account for imperfect detection and implement an efficient Bayesian variable selection approach to identify important predictors for the probability of detecting parrots at the roost. In addition, as the number of parrots at the roost are temporally correlated, we account for this temporal-autocorrelation within a parametric and non- parametric framework. We assess the performance of this new modeling framework model via a simulation study, and we also present results obtained when the new model is applied to the two case studies.
Impact of Natural mortality assumptions on the assessment model performanceNatural mortality is one of the critical processes to provide scientific advice for fisheries management based on stock assessment models. However natural mortality cannot be measured and must be estimated inside or outside the assessment model.Several methods exist to estimate M based on empirical equations or ecological theory and each one of them could give different results that can influence the assessment outputs. Here, we investigate the performance of several methods to estimate M using simulated data through the Rfishpop package implemented in R Core Team (2019) which includes tools to simulate the real dynamics of a fishery system using a generic age-structured operating model (OM) and also statistical methods for sampling data for the simulated population. Firstly, different settings are simulated using the OM, considering different fish dynamics and M structures. Afterwards, the data needed to estimate M (e.g. age max, growth parameters, weight or length at-age) are obtained from the sample functions assuming different sampling schemes. For each scenario a Montecarlo procedure is used to compute confidence intervals for the estimates of the natural mortality, then, such estimates are compared to real values of our simulated population through error measures as, mean square error (MSE) and the mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), which are used to compare and rank the models according to its performance. Once the set of models for estimating the M are evaluated, the next step is to study the behaviour of the assessment models depending on the estimated M.Age structured models such as a4a are applied in each of the settings simulated before introducing as inputs the data derived from the sampling functions and the estimates of M derived from the corresponding models. As, in the previous step, for each scenario, a Montecarlo procedure is used to compute confidence intervals of the model outputs, and then such outputs are compared to the real population. The impact on the model diagnostics (e.g. retrospective pattern) and assessment results (e.g. stock status and reference points) will be evaluated to better understand the role of natural mortality uncertainty on scientific advice for sustainable fisheries management.
On the Conway-Maxwell-Poisson point processThe Poisson point process plays a pivotal role in modeling spatial point patterns. One of its key features is that the variance and the mean of the total number of points in a given region are equal, making it unsuitable for modeling point patterns that exhibit significantly different mean and variance. To tackle such point patterns, we introduce the class of Conway-Maxwell-Poisson point processes. Our model can easily be fitted with a logistic regression, its point counts in different regions are correlated and its log-likelihood in any subregion can be easily extracted. Both simulations and real data analyses have been carried out to demonstrate the performance of the proposed model.
A Reproducibility Workflow for Scientific papers: A brief look into Movement Ecology.Reproducibility is the earmark of science. However, studies in disciplines such as biology and geosciences have shown that published work is rarely reproducible. Ensuring reproducibility is not a mandatory part of the research process and thus there are no clear procedures in place to assess nor enforce the reproducibility of scientific articles. In this study we put forward a reproducibility workflow scoring sheet on a scale from 0 to 12, based on six criteria that lead to successful reproducible papers, focusing on data, code, software and results. The reproducibility workflow can be used by authors to evaluate the reproducibility of their studies before publication and reviewers to evaluate the reproducibility of scientific papers. We used our workflow to assess the state of reproducibility in our own field of Movement Ecology, we attempted to reproduce the results from 75 papers that used behavioral pattern identification methods, published in several journals from 2010-2020. According to the reproducibility workflow, sixteen studies only reflected at least some reproducibility (scores ≥ 4). In particular, we were only able to obtain the data for 16 out of 75 papers. Out of these, a minority of papers also provided code with the data (6 out of the 16 studies). Out of the 6 studies that made both data and code available, only four studies reflected a highlevel of reproducibility (scores ≥ 9) owing it to good code annotation and execution. Based on our findings, we proposed guidelines for authors, journals and academic institutions to enhance the state of scientific reproducibility. We believe that these guidelines are particularly relevant for the statistical community, that always strives for robust statistical and research practices.
Revealing age- and sex-specific survival of the eastern barred bandicootRecovery of populations relies upon understanding demographic rates. The eastern barred bandicoot, Perameles gunnii, is a short-lived but fecund small marsupial. The mainland subspecies is considered extinct in the wild and remains extirpated from its historical range largely due to predation by foxes. The bandicoot has now been introduced to three Victorian islands, two with and one without feral cats. We aim to construct a model to estimate juvenile survival in populations with and without feral cats.Estimation of sex- and/or age-specific population demographics remained intractable due to heterogeneity in detection, and lack of reliable ageing methods. We use an hierarchical spatially-explicit open population model to estimate age-specific population size and survival of an introduced bandicoot population. We shared information on sex-specific detection probability and survival between groups of known and unknown age. This integrated approach allowed the estimation of parameters that may not have been possible from a single dataset. Preliminary results estimate juvenile survival between 0.6 and 0.8 whilst adult survival declined from 0.9 to0.6. Population growth rate was positive (ranging between 1.20 and 1.43) until population density attained2.16 ± 0.23 bandicoots per hectare, population size then remained steady. This indicates that population growth rate is mediated by adult survival on Churchill Island. Future work will explore population-specific variation and environmental drivers of vital rates to inform population viability analyses and reveal impacts of cat density on population demographics.
Distribution and habitat attributes associated with the Himalayan red panda in the westernmost distribution rangeThe Himalayan red panda (Ailurus fulgens), a recently confirmed distinct species in the red panda genus, is distributed in Nepal, India, Bhutan, and south Tibet. Nepal represents the westernmost distribution of the Himalayan red panda. This study aims to determine important habitat features influencing the distribution of red panda and recommend possible habitat corridors. This study described the current potential habitat of 3,222 km2 with the relative abundance of 3.34 signs/km in Nepal. Aspect, canopy cover, bamboo cover, and distance to water were the important habitat attributes. It suggested five potential corridors in western Nepal. Overall, the study has important implications for the conservation of the Himalayan red panda in the western distribution range.
Exploring the Influence of Farmers’ Attitudes and Livestock Husbandry Practices on Human-lion Interactions Around Meru National Park (MNP), KenyaEffective human-carnivore conflict mitigation requires exhaustive understanding of the complex drivers of conflict and their relative importance. We conducted 120 semi-structured interviews from members of 5 different ethnic groups living across 9 different villages spread around the semi-fenced Meru National Park, Kenya. We fit a Bayesian Linear Mixed Effects regression model with an index of measuring attitude as the outcome variable to assess different factors influencing attitude towards lions around the MCA. Total number of livestock owned (as an index of wealth status), reported livestock depredated from 2008-2018, distance to park boundary, height of boma fence, carnivore knowledge and education level of respondents as well as their respective interactions were considered as fixed effects. Respondent’s ethnic group was considered as a random effect. We applied a ground-up approach to modeling, whereby we combined Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) with iterative modeling to guide our modeling process. We first built a simple linear regression model and built up based on how the model performed. 95% of farmers perceived a problem with carnivores, and respondents viewed Lions (Panthera leo), Spotted Hyenas (Crocuta crocuta) and Leopards (Panthera pardus) as significantly more problematic than other species due to the threats they posed to livestock and humans. Despite this, only 15% of people admitted to having killed any large carnivores. Depredation was widespread, having affected 95% of households, and was also the most abundant form of stock loss – survey data revealed 61.4% of stock were predated, compared to 20.2% lost to disease and 18.2% to theft. An increase in livestock depredation significantly predicted negative attitudes towards carnivores as the most important factor. Other socio-economic factors such as the respondent’s ethnic group, age, education/literacy level, knowledge on carnivores, and distance from park boundary also had some influence on how problematic the local people viewed carnivores to be, albeit not significantly.The study raises the complexity of human-lion interactions in a multicultural context, whereby perceived problems could vary or potentially be exacerbated in relation to cultural differences. Furthermore, livestock husbandry practices have also been recorded to be useful in mitigating human-lion conflict in the area.
Dealing with several sources of uncertainty in modelling of community- level processesUncertainty is pervasive in ecological sciences and must be quantified properly for ecological assessment and management decisions at the scale of ecosystems. Nutrient fluxes are crucial to ocean productivity. Phytoplankton growth relies on the availability of essential nutrients, and cetacean communities could contribute significantly to the primary production dynamics by releasing nutrient-rich fecal matter in the photic zone. We used a bioenergetic model to estimate the amount of nutrients released by cetaceans, from large whales to small delphinids, in several large-scale areas around the globe. Model inputs included abundance data from broad-scale multispecies surveys, diet composition studies and analysis of nutrient concentrations in prey. The model also involved bioenergetic parameters such as body mass, metabolic cost factors, energy assimilation efficiency and elemental excretion rates, most of which were never actually measured on cetaceans. We faced several sources of uncertainty for all parameters of the model, from systematic error to natural variation or inherent (epistemic) randomness, sometimes combined. Using Monte Carlo simulations, we assumed a parametric distribution of the parameter to simulate data from statistical descriptors (mean, coefficient of variation, minimum and maximum). Parameters relevant to the composition of preys were associated to limited datasets, and we used bootstrapping, (i.e. sampling with replacement) to account for variability. We then conducted a sensitivity analysis to assess how the sources of uncertainty in the inputs affected the uncertainty in the output, and identify influential parameters using Sobol indices. Parameters resulting from bootstrapping could not be included in the sensitivity analysis, we were limited to more basic methods to assess the effect of the variability of these parameters on the output. The most influential parameter was the abundance of cetacean populations, the only parameter based on robust statistical survey methods (distance sampling), with inherent uncertainty due to sampling conditions, species and areas. Never measured parameters associated to flat distributions were only slightly influential. Our study illustrates how Monte-Carlo simulations combined with bootstrapping can be used to obtain intervals likely to contain true values of particular interest, considering several sources of uncertainty in parameters.
Maximum entropy modelling (Maxent) for mapping distribution of Mauritius thorn and River red gum distribution in the Vhembe Biosphere reserve.This study aims to model the spatial and temporal distribution of invasive alien species using the Ecological Niche model (ENM) from presence-only data. The Ecological niche model used for this study was the (Maximum Entropy) MaxEnt model. MaxEnt was used to understand the distribution of [Mauritius thorn (Caesalpinia decapetala) and River red gum (Eucalyptus camaldulensis)] globally and within the Soutpansberg Mountain in the Vhembe Biosphere Reserve (VBR). Here, we examine how climatic, environmental, and remote sensing parameters affect the establishment and distribution of Invasive alien plant (IAP) species in the VBR. Twenty-one (21) Bioclim predictor variables, ten (10) environmental variables four (4) Remote sensing products were collected across two seasons (hot-dry, cool-dry). The MaxEnt analysis for Mauritius thorn and River red gum using Environmental, GIS and Remote Sensing variables produced a significantly high Akaike information criterion (AIC) and an area under the curve (AUC) values.Upon execution, the point-wise mean maps were generated for both the global and local distribution for Mauritius thorn and River red gum. The results show that the omission on River red gum is a very good match to the predicted omission rate, the emission rate for test data drawn from the Maxent distribution itself. The AUC values allow the comparison of the performance of one model with another and are useful in evaluating multiple MaxEnt models. The Receiver Operating Curve (ROC) curve shows superior predictive ability with a mean AUC close to 1 for both Mauritius thorn and Red river gum. Jackknife was run to identify variables that are most important in the model.
Using machine learning with satellite data to monitor and quantify phytoplankton and sediment concentration in the Agulhas Bank river plume systemsRiver plumes play a major role in connecting the land to the sea. Riverine nutrient and sediment deposits into marine and estuarine environments help support phytoplankton growth and the formation of marine muddy ecosystems. Remote sensing can be used as a tool to monitor and quantify riverine sediment deposits and phytoplankton assemblages in the study region (Agulhas Bank). This study uses a synthetic dataset which models the inherent optical properties (IOPs) of phytoplankton, dissolved organic matter and sediment. The initial dataset consisted of guessed parameters which were used in a bio-optical model for phytoplankton, CDOM and sediment IOPs. In-situ aquatic and marine optical properties for the region were collected and added to the bio-optical model to create another cohort of synthetic data which better represent the optically complex region. This dataset was used to train and test a multi-layer perceptron model, an artificial neural network (ANN). The model output gave robust results of chl-a and suspended solid material concentrations. Access to higher computation resources can allow for the training of deeper neural networks with a larger synthetic dataset. This study is an example of the potential of using machine learning techniques and synthetic datasets to create aquatic monitoring remote sensing products. The trained model can be used with satellite data to routinely monitor the Agulhas bank river plume deposits and associated phytoplankton assemblages.
What ospreys teach us about model developmentDemography changes continuously in space and time. Especially migratory species that use space over large scales experience very different influencing conditions. We can learn about their survival and space use from different types of reencounters of marked individuals such as dead recoveries and resightings. In former studies, we have developed a model that estimates survival, migratory connectivity, and the observation process. We apply this to a large data set of osprey dead-reencounters in Europe and Africa showing how survival and space use of different osprey populations look when the observation process is heterogeneous. At the same time, we also learn that our spatial model can only conditionally represent the life of an osprey, as it does not include certain elementary features of an osprey life, such as age-dependent and seasonal survival or space use. We explain this using a simulation study. In the discussion we show possibilities how data that vary over the full annual cycle can nevertheless be evaluated with our model and motivate a further development of the model.
Small Graphs Comparison to Assess the Independence within Fishing FleetsWell designed management systems are able to conciliate sometimes antagonist purposes, preserve natural resources and preserve economics activities linked to this natural resources exploitation. In general, identifying a relevant management measure need a careful assessment of anthropogenic pressure on resources. When pressure is due to a set of actors, it is necessary to figure out and to take into account their potential synergistic and/or antagonistic relationships to accurate estimate.Graphs (networks) are obvious tools for representing sets of pairwise relationships among a set of entities and therefore makes graph's theory studying the properties of mathematical objects defined as sets of nodes and edges relevant to understand multiple actors relationships. Most graph-based studies available in the literature are focused on graphs with common features of so called real-world graphs that is, with large number of entities (several hundred or thousand) and very low densities ( <0.1).However, many case studies do no fit into the paradigm of large dimensions. For instance in fisheries, fleets may include only ten or few tens of interacting actors. Based on a set of small empirical graphs describing pairwise relationships (the edges) among a set of vessels (the nodes) of two french fishing fleets we tackle the problem of comparing graphs of different orders and the question of testing whether some observed small graphs can be considered as outcomes of some random graph models. This approach is based on the Graphlet Correlation Distance (GCD) a recently develop metric to quantify the distance between two graphs based on the Graphlet Correlation Matrix (GCM). First, we extend the domain of applicability of the GCD to small graphs and we show its efficiency to identify similarities or differences between small graphs. Then we propose a statistical test to assess if an empirical graph can be considered as an outcome of an Erdös-Rényi random graph models assumed characterising independent relationships.Using our statistical test we show that independent behaviour between fishermen within one of the studied fleet cannot be excluded. Such conclusion is key for appropriate use of fishing statistics in the process of deriving sustainable management of marine resource.
ABAP: An R package to access African Bird Atlas dataThe Southern African Bird Atlas Project 2 (SABAP2) is one of the largest and most important biodiversity monitoring projects in southern Africa. SABAP2 (2007-ongoing) is a follow up to the SABAP1 project (1987- 1992). The protocol developed for SABAP2 has been rolled out to multiple African countries, through the African Bird Atlas Project (ABAP), using a single atlasing protocol and set of tools that can be applied across the continent. ABAP holds over 19.4 million bird observation records, with the majority of these records falling into the SABAP2 region (South Africa, Lesotho, eSwatini, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Zambia and Mozambique), Kenya BirdMap and the Nigerian Bird Atlas Projects (http://www.birdmap.africa/). ABAP has developed a suite of API calls to facilitate easier data access for users. These API calls allow users to access raw and summarized data directly from the database for analysis in their chosen platforms. To extend these API calls, and facilitate integration with the R environment, we have created an R package that connects to the ABAP API, allowing R to access data directly, removing any unnecessary intermediate steps. These data integrate seamlessly into workflows using trending R formats such as `tibble` or the spatial `sf`. In addition, the package, also named ABAP, offers the possibility to annotate observations with Google Earth Engine environmental data, facilitating the flexibility and reproducibility of the analyses.
Oceanographic Drivers of Cuvier’s (Ziphius cavirostris) and Sowerby’s (Mesoplodon bidens) Beaked Whales Acoustic Occurrence along the Irish Shelf EdgeCuvier’s and Sowerby’s beaked whales occur year-round in western Irish waters, yet remain some of the most poorly understood cetaceans in the area. Considering the importance of the area for anthropogenic activities and the sensitivity of beaked whales to noise, understanding their ecology is essential to minimise potential overlaps. To this end, fixed bottom-mounted autonomous acoustic recorders were deployed at 10 stations over four recording periods spanning from May 2015 to November 2016. Acoustic data were collected over 1934 cumulative days, for a total of 7942 h of recordings. To model the probability ofpresence of Cuvier’s and Sowerby’s beaked whales in the area as a function of oceanographic predictors, we used Generalised Additive Models, fitted with Generalised Estimating Equations to deal with temporal autocorrelation. To reflect prey availability, oceanographic variables acting as proxies of primary productivity and prey aggregation processes such as upwelling events and thermal fronts were selected.Our results demonstrated that oceanographic variables significantly contributed to the occurrence of Cuvier’s and Sowerby’s beaked whales (p-values between <0.001 and <0.05). The species showed similarpreferences, with the exception of sdSST. The inclusion of a parameter accounting for the recorders location confirmed the existence of a latitudinal partitioning for those species in the area. This study provides a point of comparison for future research and represents an important step towards a better understanding of those elusive species.
Assessing sex dimorphic species using Stock Synthesis: the case of the Atlantic southern hake stockSouthern European hake (Merluccius merluccius) is a quite relevant stock in social and economic terms in Iberian waters. Even though there are some knowledge gaps that have complicated the implementation of a data rich model to provide a sound catch advice and it is currently assessed with a data limited model. Due to the need for a new assessment model, it was decided to use Stock Synthesis (SS) (Methot and Wetzel (2013), as it is one of the main models currently used for age- and length-based species (such as the South Atlantic hake stock). As an integrated model, SS allows the input of incomplete trends of data from different sources, such as catch data, catch per unit effort (CPUE) and survey indices. Among the multiple configurations of SS, we can find the alternative of single biology (sex, growth and natural mortality), as established in the previous stock assessment model, or separate sexes. In addition, this model allows to indicate that each stock entity starts to grow in the first month of the year, but also different recruitment peaks can be specified. It is important to mention that i) European hake is a highly dimorphic species as females are considerably larger than males, ii) this stock presents different spawning peaks throughout the year and iii) information on the sex-separated size distribution and hence the sex ratio of the stock has been recently obtained from oceanographic surveys. For these reasons, alternative SS models with various configurations have been tested for this species. Results are presented and discussed together in order to find the best alternative for the assessment of this stock.
EoAR Mixture Models: Pooling Information from Multiple Sites to Estimate Bat Fatality at Wind-Power FacilitiesEven though agricultural production generates biodiversity degradation, ecological communities also provide valuable services such as the regulation of insect pests on crops by their natural enemies.Generating electricity in wind farms reduces the use of coal and natural gas; however, each new installed turbine increases the mortality of birds and bats. Estimating the true fatality rate from collision or barotrauma is challenging due to the low probability of detecting a dead bat. Only a fraction of the area that might contain carcasses is logged, scavengers may remove carcasses before starting the search, and searchers often miss carcasses on the ground. The statistical consequence is that carcasses are often not reported, although fatalities actually did occur. The objective of this work is to obtain accurate estimates of the number of dead bats at all sites using only as input the number of carcasses found at each site, without the need to consider other post-construction monitoring data. To achieve this objective, we extend the Binomial N-Mixture EoAR model proposed by McDonald et al. 2021 by including random variation between sites. We do this either as random variation in the detection probability or as random variation in bat mortality. The model can be further extended by introducing spatial correlation in the random effects.Results based on simulations show that our model: can be fit to data from scenarios with low number of fatalities; on average both mean and median estimates have minimum bias and approach the true value as sample size increases; credible intervals achieve a coverage probability close to their nominal level. The methods will be applied to data from post-construction monitoring of wind farms in Iowa, USA.
From genotypes to demography: eco-evolutionary dynamics in Atlantic salmonEcological and evolutionary processes can occur on the same timescale and influence each other. Yet, few models have been developed to quantify feedback between ecological and evolutionary processes in wild populations. Such models often require data from long-term populations monitoring and a good understanding of the genetic basis of life history traits. In Atlantic salmon, large effect genes are associated with age at maturity. Interestingly, one of these genes, in the vgll3 region, displays a sex-specific effect with reversal dominance, potentially reflecting sexually antagonistic selection. Here, we developed an eco- evolutionary dynamics model, combining 40 years of genetic and demographic data, to quantify sex-specific selection at these large effect genes, their allele frequency dynamics and influence on population growth.We discuss results obtained from the Imsa population (Norway), and compared them with assumptions based on the genetic architecture.
Spatiotemporal modelling of marine recreational angling using data from a smartphone applicationUnderstanding marine recreational fishing catches is important for the sustainable management of fish stocks, but collecting data using traditional survey methods is often difficult and expensive. Data from smartphone applications are becoming increasingly available and could supplement traditional data collection. However, app users are not representative of all anglers, so it is necessary to understand the utility and potential uses of app data. Fishbrain (https://fishbrain.com/) is a smartphone application for angling, with a community of millions of individuals who record and share their catches. I will present the results of spatiotemporal models fitted using integrated nested Laplace approximation with the ‘inlabru’ package in R, using catches around the UK recorded in Fishbrain, and discuss some challenges and limitations of the data.
A goodness-of-fit metric for integrated-step-selection analysesUnderstanding the drivers and consequences of animal movement is the primary goal of movement ecologists. As animals move through space, they experience changing environmental conditions, acquire necessary resources, and avoid risk – how they respond should ultimately affect their fitness but depends both on the habitat and the animals’ movement capacity. Integrated-step-selection analysis (iSSA) is a recently developed statistical approach for simultaneously estimating both the habitat selection process and the selection-free movement process. iSSA has been used, for example, to examine how animals change their habitat selection and movement behavior in response to predation risk, roads, human recreation, management actions, and protected areas.While iSSA has become popular for making inference about animal habitat use and movement, there is no consensus on how to evaluate a model’s goodness-of-fit. iSSAs use conditional logistic regression as a fitting “trick” to approximate the parameters of the underlying model. The resulting model predictions are not themselves interpretable, since different parameters in the model may pertain to either the habitat selection kernel or the selection-free movement kernel. A goodness-of-fit metric for such a model – for example, a likelihood-based pseudo-R? – is thus not easily interpreted. Here, we propose a pseudo-R? based not on the likelihood of the conditional logistic regression model, but rather based on a selection-adjusted movement kernel – the normalized product of the habitat selection and selection-free movement kernels – parameterized by the fitted iSSA. We used simulations to demonstrate the performance of our metric, and we compared it to the naïve pseudo-R? calculated using the likelihood under the conditional logistic regression model.
Haul-out behaviour and anthropogenic disturbance of an increasing population of seals in the UKHarbour seals (Phoca vitulina) and grey seals (Halichoerus grypus) both occur within the UK, but display contrasting population trends. Whilst grey seals are typically increasing in number, harbour seals have shown varying patterns since experiencing severe pandemics in recent decades. There is a need for monitoring of regional and local populations to understand overall trends.This study utilised a 20-year dataset of boat-based seal counts from two neighbouring harbours in the Solent region of southeast England, supplemented with six months of dedicated, land-based behavioural surveys.Generalised Additive Models (GAMs) showed a significant increase in the numbers of both species over time, although site-specific differences existed. Accompanying photographic-identification data supported this increase and suggests evidence of site fidelity, with a total of 68 harbour and eight grey seals identified.Further GAMs based on behavioural observations investigated haul-out patterns in relation to temporal and environmental variables, revealing patterns linked to season, time of day, tidal state, temperature, and wind speed. Seals were particularly abundant in the summer months approximately 2-hours after low tide.Concerningly, behavioural surveys also showed high levels of anthropogenic disturbance in this area, primarily from seasonal increases in recreational boating activity. Over 100 disturbance events were observed, with approximately 20% resulting in seals fleeing from the haul-out site. Disturbance events were more prevalent in summer, on weekends, and in response to kayaks, canoes, and motorboats with large crews.Overall, this study shows reasons for both hope and concern. The rising number of seals suggests the Solent is an increasingly important area for these species, particularly as a pupping site for harbour seals. However, this area also experiences high anthropogenic pressure, which has direct overlap with periods of peak seal abundance and the harbour seal pupping season. Increased public awareness campaigns targeting recreational boaters are recommended to help mitigate disturbance events.
Investigating drivers of cetacean occurrence in a cross-border region, the Malin Sea, using data collected during a transnational European fishery surveyMarine top predators tend to aggregate near topographic features (coastlines, sea mounts, shelf breaks, canyon systems, sandbanks), dynamic oceanographic systems (fronts, currents) or more ephemeral phenomena (seasonal upwelling, eddies, ice-edge) where prey concentration is relatively predictable. Irish and Scottish waters include a variety of these critical features and are amongst the most important habitats for cetaceans in Europe. In Ireland, Cetaceans on the Frontier and ObSERVE surveys have shed light on habitat drivers of several offshore species but remained spatially and temporally discrete. Moreover, due to their design, transect-line surveys tend to provide lower coverage near the limits of survey blocks, therefore leaving border regions marginally sampled when surveying only national waters. So far, few studies have focused on cetaceans distribution in the region of the Malin Sea, overlapping with the Irish EEZ, UK EEZ and International waters compared to the rest of Irish and Scottish waters. Despite an apparent rich species diversity, relative cetacean abundance over the Malin shelf seems rather low in comparison with hotspots documented further north off the Hebrides, and west and south of Ireland. As the environment appears suitable for many species based on their current range and habitat preferences, it remains unclear whether this apparent low prevalence arises from a lack of published results, uneven survey coverage, or accurately portrays an ecological discontinuity between western Scotland and western Ireland habitats. Since 2016, the multi-disciplinary transnational Western European Shelf Pelagic Acoustic Survey (WESPAS) has been extensively and systematically surveying the entire region of the Malin Shelf, monitoring marine megafauna, seabird, fish stocks and zooplankton distribution while collecting in-situ measurements of oceanographic conditions. It is to date the most comprehensive and longest on-going time series for visual observations of marine mammals in the area. Here we use the WESPAS dataset to model, within a Bayesian framework, cetacean presence against selected environmental and biological variables; and investigate cetacean distribution and habitat preferences in the Malin Sea, notably in relation with the occurrence of a dynamic tidal front. Ultimately, results from this study should contribute towards informing strategic management and conservation decision making in this cross-border area.
Quantifying foraging niche separation of two sympatric penguin species in the Antarctic PeninsulaSympatric species can respond to interspecific competition by segregating foraging behaviour along different niche axes.Our study aims were to determine how the foraging behaviour and habitat use of two closely related seabird species - Gentoo (Pygoscelis papua) and Chinstrap (Pygoscelis antarcticus) penguins - co-inhabiting two study sites in the Antarctic Peninsula differ as a function of competitive interactions and environmental factors. Specifically, we assessed if there was niche partitioning along 1) spatial (horizontal)-, 2) vertical-, and 3) temporal axes between the species, one which is increasing in number (Gentoo) and the other which is declining (Chinstrap), and whether they targeted specific water temperatures when foraging.Tags with high-resolution GPS, dive and temperature loggers were deployed on adult penguins from both species throughout the 2018/19 breeding season, at Nelson Island and Kopaitic Island. We obtained GPS tracks for 1096 foraging trips from 155 Chinstrap and 66 Gentoo penguins. We interpolated the diving and at-sea locations along each track by fitting continuous-time correlated random walk models, and estimated utilization distributions of space used by penguins assuming bivariate normal probability densities. The degree of overlap between the observed utilization distributions of Chinstrap and Gentoo penguins was quantified and compared to a set of pseudotracks simulated to create a null spatial distribution which assumed no interspecific competition.At Nelson Island, Chinstrap penguins had larger utilization distributions than Gentoo penguins, with clear segregation between species evident during incubation. At Kopaitic Island, both species had small foraging ranges throughout the breeding season, with higher spatial overlap. We found that remotely sensed sea surface temperature data were not of high enough resolution to examine whether penguins targeted specific temperatures while foraging. Our next step is therefore to create high-resolution maps of temperature through the water column using the 1-second resolution temperature data collected by the penguins and kriging (geostatistical interpolation) which will enable us to determine whether Gentoo and Chinstrap penguins target specific water temperatures.
Presence-only Model for Marked Point Processes: A Preferential Sampling Extension Solution for Fish Biomass EstimationPreferential Sampling models have received much attention in the last few years. Althogh its original model is applied to Geostatistics, it can be recognized in other types of data, such as point processes, in the form of presence-only data. This has been already identified in the Statistics literature. It is valuable to draw advantages from both presence-only and preferential sampling specific literatures. In particular, we propose a way to deal with biased sampling of a continuous variable collected by opportunistic sampling. For our particular case, we employ the idea on sardine biomass collected during professional fishing expeditions.The data, although intuitively understood, presents complications such as two types of preferential sampling. One is about the fish presence locations, and the preferentiability happens due to the travel pattern of fishing boats not being representative of the region. The other happens with respect to the biomass itself, as the fishermen prefer visiting regions with larger biomass. These and other theoretical and practical aspects of the problem are discussed. A probabilistically well defined approach is discussed. Its results may be an incentive to apply data collection in fishing expeditions as a means for decision making aimed at benefiting both ecological and economical aspects.
How do ungulates learn to migrate? A mechanistic test of the social learning hypothesis.For migratory ungulates, recent evidence has shown that spatial memory shapes migration, but we do not yet understand the behavioral mechanisms by which migration routes are learned or maintained. It has long been thought that migratory behavior in ungulates is culturally transmitted, with juveniles learning migration patterns from their mothers and then adopting them as adults. Unfortunately, this assumption has never been empirically tested. We tested the social learning hypothesis to advance our understanding of the behavioral mechanisms that underpin the acquisition of knowledge in ungulate migration.Specifically, we addressed the following predictions: 1) juveniles learn migration strategies from their mothers and adopt them as adults, and 2) juveniles learn migration strategies from other animals in their group and adopt them as adults. Analyzing GPS data from mother-offspring pairs of both mule deer and pronghorn, we found that 95% of mule deer (n=7), pronghorn (n=30) juveniles underwent the same seasonal movements as their mothers in their first year of life. In the spring of 2022, we will have a complete second year of data for juveniles. We will then evaluate the migrations of their second year of life, at which point they are considered adults, migrating independently of their mothers. To identify the mechanisms that underpin how juveniles learn to migrate, we used a step selection function (SSF). At each used and available step we extracted landscape variables (slope, elevation, etc.), phenological gradients (green-up, snow depth), natal route (distance to migration route of mom in the previous year with the fawn), and group dynamics (distance to nearest neighbor’s route in the same year). This SSF will allow us to simultaneously evaluate what factors are most important to an ungulate’s ability to navigate during migration. Our preliminary findings suggest that female juveniles adopt similar migration strategies as their mothers. This research could have important management implications. If juveniles learn from their mothers, for example, this could place a higher conservation value on maintaining existing migration routes.
Searching for the best audio classifier for animal-borne audiologgersDuring the last decade, biologging has emerged as a central tool for behavioural ecology, allowing to collect sometimes massive datasets that are however bringing up new methodological challenges for ecologists.The period has simultaneously seen massive advances and successes in deep learning approaches, and many consider that they could become the go-to method for biologging, even being directly integrated into the loggers (edge computing). Deep learning can be tedious to implement though, and is well-known to be power-hungry, whereas simpler classification methods such as gradient boosting on decision trees (e.g. Catboost) could also be highly successful. Comparisons of these classification approaches using real-world examples from ecological studies remain rare however. Here we will fill this gap by comparing the performance of various classifiers of increasing complexity on audio data collected from a animal-borne loggers. We will use several examples to assess the generality of our results, including for instance snorts from plains zebras or barks of sheep guard dogs. We will report on the standard assessments of accuracy of the classification (e.g. recall, precision), which will allow not only to judge the relative merits of the various classifiers, but also show the ability of state-of-the- art approaches to classify audio data from animal-borne loggers, a emerging tool. We will also discuss these results in the light of the numerical complexity of the methods, which is a critical driver of the consumption that would be imposed onto the logger should these methods be embedded for edge computing in low- power biologging devices.
A Bayesian nonparametric framework for batch-mark models with losses on capture and cases of intractable likelihood functions.Batch-marking is an efficient way for monitoring wildlife populations when individual marking is not feasible. Typically, in batch-mark experiments, all individuals caught for the first time on a sampling occasion are given the same mark, so that the data include information on how many individuals from each “batch” are recaught on each subsequent sampling occasion but not on how many times each individual has been recaught. There has been an increased interest in recent years in batch-mark experiments because of new technologies that enable marking of different species.In this talk, I will describe the formulation of batch-mark models within a Bayesian non-parametric framework, and in particular one that employs the Polya Tree (PT) prior. We show that our PT framework provides an efficient way of inference in batch-mark experiments and we demonstrate the ease with which we can incorporate additional information, such as losses on capture, in the model within our framework.Finally, we consider an ABC-based approach with our PT framework for more complicated cases, which lead to intractable likelihood functions, such as when not all caught individuals are marked before being released into the population or when all “batches” are given the same mark. We demonstrate our new framework using real and simulated data.
Epigeic predator communities’ response to contrasting agricultural management systemsIntensive agriculture and expansion have led to a rapid biodiversity loss worldwide due to increasing homogenous landscapes and the utilization of agrochemicals. A significant concern is that the management associated with this change may impact species diversity, eroding their ability to provide ecosystem services. Epigeic predators are an important component of agricultural production, providing ecosystem functions such as pests and weeds control, but little is known about agricultural management's effect on the diversity of these assemblages. To address this knowledge, we examined the responses of epigeic predators to various agroecosystems to comprehend how agricultural management of grain crops influences the composition and diversity of these assemblages. Using pitfall traps and active search methods, we investigated how epigeic predator communities respond to conventional tillage (CT), integrated farming (INT), and Semi-conservation agriculture (SCA). Species diversity was analyzed using data from differently managed cultivated lands consisting of wheat, oats, maize, soybean, sunflower, and ryegrass. The diversity of epigeic predator species were found to be influenced by farming management systems and crop heterogeneity. The epigeic predatory assemblages sampled consisted of spiders, ants, and ground beetles. The total number of individuals of epigeic predators from the four agricultural management systems was 4 253, of which 689 species were recorded. We collected 1689 ground beetles, 963 spiders, and 880 ants from each of the four agricultural systems. The overall predatory abundance was significantly affected by agricultural management, according to ANOVA and the Mann-Whitney test. The community composition of epigeic predatory arthropods differed significantly between agricultural management systems according to (PERMANOVA) also NMDS revealed a strong and consistent separation of the epigeic predators in either between agricultural managements SNA, CT, and INT. The beneficial effects of farming management on epigeic predator communities support the notion that promoting sustainable agricultural practices is required to improve the efficacy of agricultural pests and weeds control. This could aid in replacing anthropogenic inputs in modern agriculture while also ensuring adequate economic and food security.
Using model-based cluster analysis to describe seabird assemblages off East AustraliaTraditional methods of describing species assemblages and bioregions commonly use a two-step approach. Alternatively, probabilistic methods, such as Region of Common Profiles (RCP), enable environmental spaces and species profiles to be modelled simultaneously through specifying a statistical model. This also allows the opportunity to compare models, present uncertainty around the results, and check model assumptions. Australia supports a high diversity of seabirds, yet no attempts to describe seabird assemblages at broad- scales have been made. In particular, the eastern coast of Australia offers wide environmental gradients, spanning from the tropics to the sub-Antarctic, in which a diverse range of seabird assemblages would be expected. Here, we used RCP models to describe seabird assemblages off East Australia. RCP modelling is a type of multivariate model-based cluster analysis, which identifies ‘statistical bioregions’, i.e. ‘regions’ of similar environmental spaces in which the probability of observing a set of species (‘profiles’) is constant but different from other regions. Data were collected at-sea, along transects carried out during 15 voyages (2016–2020) over ~37 degrees of latitude between the Coral Sea and Tasmania. Seabirds were recorded continuously and binned into 10-min observations (n = 9990). In total, 142,883 individual seabirds were counted from 73 species. We used oceanographic and physiographic variables to model environmental spaces (sea surface temperature and salinity, eddy kinetic energy, bathymetry, slope, and 8-days averaged chlorophyll-a concentration). Based on the availability of environmental data, 7019 complete observations were used to model RCPs. We filtered the main dataset to include only species exceeding a minimum number of occurrence thresholds (25, 30, 35, 40), then used these datasets to fit the models. For each dataset, we modelled 2 to 12 RCPs and used 63 candidate models derived from all possible linear, additive combinations of the environmental covariates (totalling 2772 models). When using a subset of the main dataset (2018–2019), preliminary analyses suggested two RCPs (coastal and oceanic). We will present the analysis of the whole dataset, aiming to describe the environmental characteristics which define seabird assemblages off eastern Australia.
Investigating the effect of variable animal-borne tag durations on parameter precision and uncertaintyAnimal-borne tags record detailed data about individual animals, which might then be used to make inferences about a common process across animals. However, the duration of the recording time is often not controlled by the researchers, and hence can be highly variable. How to combine the information from animals with variable sampling durations becomes a question of interest and, in particular, evaluating what is the minimum duration that provides reliable parameter estimates is fundamental. Deep diving cetaceans are often tagged with DTAGs (Digital Acoustic Recording Tags), which collect a range of measurements including acoustic data. These animals tend to have almost metronomic behaviors, conducting a succession of deep foraging dive cycles. The duration of DTAGs is quite variable, depending on the tag version and animal physiology/ behavior, some only have valid information for a few minutes, and others can contain several days of data. This raises a question: Is there a minimum number of deep dive cycles that a tag needs to contain to estimate a reliable parameter of interest? We use data from over 100 sperm whale DTAGs (tag duration varying from 20 minutes to 36 hours), collected at eight different locations over thirteen different years, to investigate this question. The parameter of interest is the rate at which the sperm whales produce their foraging clicks, which is relevant for density estimation from acoustic data. We consider a resampling approach, to evaluate how the variability and precision of the estimated cue rate change as a function of tag recording time. This allows us to identify what might be minimum amount of information required to estimate a reliable individual average and the best way to combine the information across multiple tags to estimate a mean cue rate. We discuss weighted means as a possible option, the adequacy of these depending on the within- (over time) versus between-whale variability and the mean value one wishes to estimate.
Allometric scaling of sustained movement speed in running, flying, and swimming animalsUnderstanding the ecological consequences of landscape connectivity requires animal dispersal models that are both sufficiently general and biologically realistic. We derive three alternative allometric movement models, of varying complexity, that consider active dispersal distance as the product of the active metabolic rate, the metabolic cost of locomotion, and the time spent moving: A simple allometric movement model that only considers the metabolic demands associated with sustained muscle activity predicts that the speeds sustained by animals during dispersal should follow a power-law scaling relationship with body mass; saturating and hump-shaped allometric movement models additionally consider how metabolic heat, a byproduct of muscle activity, constrains the sustained movements of larger animals. Using Bayesian parameter estimation and an extensive empirical dataset of sustained dispersal speeds, we show that an allometric movement model that includes allometric constraints on maximum heat-dissipation capacity best captures hump-shaped trends in the sustained movement speeds of running, flying, and swimming animals. Our results suggest that the inability to dissipate metabolic heat reduces the sustained speeds of the largest animals. This provides the mechanistic basis upon which to model the dispersal rates of animals in spatial networks such as meta-foodwebs.
Predicting potential Wattled Crane (Bugeranus carunculatus) distribution within the Okavango Delta, Botswana using maximum entrophyThe International Union for Conservation of Nature rates the Wattled Crane as “vulnerable” and estimates population of mature individuals to range from 6000 to 6300. These have the same conservation status as elephant(Loxodanta africana) and lion(Panthera leo) but they have a narrow habitat suitability range. In Botswana, the bird is categorized as an endangered species. Therefore, it is of great significance to study the species as a proactive conservation measure for its survival. The Wattled Crane act as key bioindicator of Okavango Delta wetland system status. Due to erratic flows of floodwaters from Angolan highlands the population in Botswana have been irregularly nomadic in response to water availability. The birds were sighted in previously conducted aerial surveys in the early 2000’s and most recent extensive resurveying within the Okavango Delta in 2019. The data was overlayed with changes in landcover over the years to assess extent of relation. The Wattled Crane was found to confine itself in permanently waterlogged areas. There have been mushrooming tourism enterprises within the study area over the years. There is need to further extend monitoring sites to other temporary water catchments in northern Botswana in the summer season for potential use by Wattled Cranes.
Hierarchical multi-method occupancy estimates inform disease surveillance from bats in Cambodia.An important component of disease surveillance is the spatial habitat relationships of vertebrate pathogen reservoirs. We used a hierarchical multi-method occupancy model to understand habitat relationships of bats in Cambodia to augment disease surveillance efforts. Efforts to estimate habitat -host relationships don’t often occur at such large spatial scales. Sites were selected from a stratified random sample based on habitat class. Bats were sampled using mist net arrays and acoustic detectors at 227 sites from each province and habitat type in Cambodia. Forty-five species were detected using mist net arrays, and 39 species were detected by acoustic detectors. We developed a bat call reference library for identifying anonymous call data to species or species group. We manually vetted acoustic data using Scan’R software and a R-language shiny app ‘SZapp’. We estimated detectability for all species and survey method.Detectability varied among species and survey method. Model averaged estimates of detectability were then used to estimate probability of species occupancy by habitat class. Pathogen presence/absence was included as a covariate in the occupancy model and estimates of pathogen probability of occupancy by habitat were calculated. These estimates were used to develop predictive probabilistic risk maps of pathogen prevalence and a guide to inform future disease surveillance efforts. A hierarchical multi-method occupancy framework is a practical approach to estimating the spatial prevalence of pathogens, and averaged estimates of detectability allow more precise and accurate estimates of occupancy, especially with species where a single survey method only captures a small proportion of the species assemblage.
A new Temporal Transferability Index for range change modelsWe define and validate here a new metric to assess the temporal transferability of Range Change Models (RCM) that accounts for the dependence of temporal predictive performance on the goodness of fit of RCM. At the moment the only metric assessing transferability of RCMs as a ratio of the goodness of fit is the Transferability Index (TI) defined by Randin et al. (2006). This metric was originally designed for the spatial transference of species distribution models (e.g. when predicting the potential spread of invasive species using native ranges to train the models) and adapted for temporal transference by Dobrowski et al (2011). There are two key limitations of this metric: i) The most important one is that it requires the computation of predictive performance of models transferred both forward (forecasts) AND backward in time (hindcasts), which is an issue because the mechanisms governing range dynamics work directionally in time. Therefore, temporal transferability should be assessed separately for hindcasts and forecasts; and ii) The TI is based on AUC-ROC, which may not be adequate because it is susceptible to changes in the prevalence of the species across time (e.g. when the range change result in range contraction or expansion). Instead, we propose to use a metric that has been reported more robust to changes in prevalence, the AUC-PR. We validate this metric by using the virtual ecologist approach. We simulated recent (1970-2010) and future (2010-2050) range-shifts of shrub and tree species and use them as the true biological phenomena. We then simulated the sampling process in the three times to build RCMs, which were then transferred to generate species distribution forecasts. The forecasts were evaluated using both TI and the new TTI, by contrasting forecasts with the true occupancy known from the simulated data. We show that TTI is better at evaluating model transferability for species that have different predictive performance for forecasts and hindcasts, and for species that have greater changes in prevalence over time.
The effect of altered rainfall seasonality on C4 grass expansion in the Cape Floristic RegionClimate projections in many Mediterranean-type ecosystems, including the Cape Floristic Region, predict changes in rainfall seasonality. Winter rainfall is decreasing, but there has not been a corresponding decrease in summer rains, raising the relative contribution of rain in summer. Moreover, these rainfall changes are associated with increasing temperatures. Warmer temperatures during the wet winters and additional summer rainfall, may favour warm-season C? grasses relative to cool-season C? vegetation.Palaeo-ecological evidence suggests that C? grasses may have expanded at the expense of Fynbos, following changes in rainfall seasonality. In this study we investigated the effects of rainfall seasonality changes on C? grass invasion into the Fynbos. We conducted a greenhouse experiment and a field-based rainfallmanipulation design to test the response of C? grass recruitment and establishment (growth and survival) to increased summer rainfall in different soil types in the Fynbos. The nested hierarchical experimental design of both the greenhouse and field experiments required the use of mixed models to investigate study outcomes. Our findings show that recruitment and establishment were promoted by resource availability (moisture, soil nutrients) during the growing season. However, grass growth was comparatively lower in the field due to slow-growth and high mortality rates, than in the greenhouse. Nevertheless, these results suggest that moisture, edaphic factors, or the interaction of both may influence the potential to invade. This could provide useful generalizations on the mechanisms and limitations of C? grass invasion in different vegetation types in the Cape Floristic Region and may inform future grassland management practices.
Spatio–temporal variation of species diversity in groundwater dependent ecosystems: Insights from the Rao's QClimate change, landcover change, and groundwater over–abstraction threaten the existence of Groundwater Dependent Ecosystems (GDE), despite these environments being biodiversity hotspots. Species diversity in GDEs requires routine monitoring to conserve the biodiversity status and preserve the ecosystem services in these environments. However, in–situ monitoring of species diversity in extensive or transboundary groundwater resources remains a challenge. Inherently, the Spectral Variation Hypothesis (SVH) and, remotely sensed data provide a unique opportunity to monitor GDEs response to seasonal or intra–annual environmental stressors, which is key in achieving national or regional biodiversity targets. This study presents the first attempt towards monitoring intra–annual spatio–temporal variations in species diversity in the Khakea–Bray Transboundary Aquifer using Landsat 8 OLI Operational Land Imager (OLI) derived metrics. The coefficient of variation was used to measure spectral heterogeneity, which is a function of environmental heterogeneity. The coefficient of variation was used to calculate the ?- and ? measures of species diversity (Shannon–Weiner Index and the Rao’s Q, respectively), whilst monotonic trends in the spatio–temporal variation of species diversity were derived, using the Mann–Kendall non–parametric test. Lastly, to explain the spatio–temporal variation of species diversity we used a set of environmental variables along with a machine learning algorithm (random forest). We observed that species diversity was relatively high during the wet season and low during the dry season and these changes were mainly driven by landcover and climate–related variables. Specifically, significant changes in species diversity were around natural water pans, along roads and rivers, and cropping areas. Furthermore, these changes were better predicted by the Rao’s Q (RMSE = 6.63 and %RMSE =42.41) more than the Shannon–Weiner Index (RMSE =33.25 and %RMSE =63.94). Our observations on the drivers and changes in species diversity provide new insights on the possible effects of futuristic landcover change and climate variability on GDEs. This information is imperative considering that these environments are biodiversity hotspots capable of supporting livelihoods. More importantly, this work provides a spatially explicit framework on how GDEs can be monitored to achieve Sustainable Development Goal 15.
Hierarchical forecasting models of stink bug population dynamics for pest managementThe intensification of agricultural production has been accompanied by increasing pressure from pests. This is resulting in a substantial increase in the use of synthetic pesticides, many of which have negative consequences on the environment and the sustainability of agricultural activity. Integrated pest management (IPM) provides a framework for the development and use of sustainable yet effective control strategies. It promotes, among other things, the monitoring of pest population dynamics and the use of control decision tools, such as action thresholds and predictive models. In this work, we aimed to develop a predictive model of stink bug abundance to increase the efficacy and efficiency of IPM-based pest control tactics. We use an empirical and Bayesian modelling approach based on an auto-regressive structure that explicitly takes into account the (noisy and biased) observation process (i.e., state-space model) of stink bug (Pentadomidae) population dynamics. During the summer of 2017, stink bug abundance was measured in 8 different localities in Argentina for at least 8 weeks, by taking 180 weekly samples using the vertical beat sheet method. With this data, along with soybean crop phenology and meteorological data, we, (1) made short-term forecasts of stink bug abundance, (2) evaluated the predictive capacity of different variants of the model using WAIC and LOO-CV, and (3) analyzed how the uncertainty of the predictions of our best performing model vary as a function of weekly sample size. The forecasts made with our best-performing model showed a reasonable degree of accuracy and precision, and the uncertainty analysis suggests a sample size of 60 to obtain a good balance between precision and sampling effort. One way in which predictive performance could be improved is by having a robust measure of vertical beat sheet error and bias and how these vary. Such data would also allow us to have a reliable estimate of the true population size. We conclude that state-space models are useful for making stink bug abundance forecasts, and can provide growers with a tool to make better-informed decisions about the timing and necessity of carrying out pest controls.
Startling Seals to Save Salmon: Assessing effectiveness of an acoustic deterrent with a statistical application of CReSS-SALSA 2DThis study presents the first implementation of a new acoustic deterrent, Targeted Acoustic Startle Technology (TAST) as a conservation tool to mitigate over-predation on an endangered population of Chinook salmon (Oncorhynchus tshawytscha) by harbour seals (Phoca vitulina) at a vulnerable point along their migration path at the Ballard Locks in Seattle Washington. The device was deployed for ten days, and trained observers recorded seal occurrence and behaviour in the study area while the device was on and off. A species distribution modelling technique called Complex Regional Spatial Smoother (CReSS) was applied to the spatial data with a Spatially Adaptive Localized Smoothing Algorithm (SALSA) to automate knot selection. The model was used to predict the probability of seal occurrence over the two-dimensional study area as a function of whether the TAST was on or off, and other smooth covariates. The model predicted that overall, seal presence probability did not change as a result of the TAST, but rather the spatial distribution of seals in the study area was further and more spread out when the device was on. This study demonstrates the TAST's effectiveness, and establishes its potential as a conservation tool for reducing seal predation intensity on an endangered population of Chinook salmon.
Impact of environmental variation on female polar bears (Ursus maritimus) reproductive tactics and life histories.Life-history theory predicts that an optimal level of parental investment should maximize current reproductive success balanced against maintenance, survival, and future reproduction.Using long-term (30 years) individual data on 665 female polar bears (Ursus maritimus) from Svalbard, we assessed the impact of environmental factors (sea-ice dynamics and arctic oscillation phase) and maternal traits on litter size and survival. We also investigated the impact of environmental factors and maternal traits on body mass differences among twin litters which we hypothesized would reflect the cost of reproduction.To do so, we used logistic and gamma regression models, and a multi-state capture-recapture model accounting for the dependency existing among individual' life histories within each polar bear family unit until offspring independence (at 2 years-old). Analyses were performed in a Bayesian framework using nimble.As previously shown, litter size varied with maternal age, with younger female having higher chances of losing a cub during their first months of life. The effects of environmental factors also varied with maternal age, although they were generally weak. Unexpectedly, sea-ice dynamics had little effect on litter size.Because population growth mostly depends on female's reproductive success, itself influenced by maternal traits, our findings highlight the importance of accounting for individual heterogeneity and extended parental care to understand the species response to environmental perturbations.
Statistical Tools Driven Science Policy Interface for Strengthening Biodiversity and Ecosystem ServicesIn lieu of ever so evolving landscapes, there is a constant pressure on biodiversity and the myriad of ecosystem services it offers. In order to strengthen science policy interface for biodiversity and ecosystem services for conservation of human well-being, nexus between biodiversity and conservation and sustainable development varied statistical tools are applied. Science policy interface with the Science Based Target Initiative is a evolving landscapes in ecosystem based restoration framework. Aligning it with statistical tools further adds to dynamics for ecosystem management. The statistical tool includes : Good Quality of Life (GQL) = Human Wellbeing and factor is under pressure and indicated as P* - Percentage of undernourished populace ; Nature Contributions to People (NCP) = Ecosystem Goods Services - impacted where in two factors are considered – being at risk, not at risk, unknown level of risk extinction.Anthropogenic assets: Institutional, governance and other indirect drivers (IGID) (Drivers and response level) – Percentage of category I nations in CITES, proportion of area of forest production under FSC and PEFC certification, proportion of areas under protected areas; Protected area coverage of key biodiversity areas; Species Protection Index, Protected Areas Connectness Index, Species Status Information Index; Direct Drivers (Natural and anthropogenic): Ecological footprint, Biodiversity Habitat Index (BHI), Forest area as of % of land area; Biodiversity Intactness Index, Species Protection Index; Protected area coverage of key biodiversity areas; Nature (at Status level) = Biodiversity and Ecosystem Systems: Biodiversity Habitat Index, Species Habitat Index, forest area as of % of land area, trend in forest extent (tree cover), Red list Index. These tools are based as per the CBD (Convention of Biodiversity), SBSTTA 20 draft indicator, IPBES task force for data and knowledge. Other notable tool that can be applied include: Bayesian modelling and decision analysis for ecosystem services assessment. Bayesian model and the decision tree for its computation relies on the following attribute : Management intervention, cost of intervention, threats, ecosystem structure and function in order to know the extent of restoration required as it includes ecosystem goods and services, with ecological production function, includes economic or multi attribute evaluation leading to economic and other benefits including net benefits and or tradeoffs. The key deliverables from the paper are application of strategic tools which increases the ease of facilitation of the ecosystem goods and services computation for resolving and restoring multi iterative challenges and processes to nullify.
Statistical power to detect abundance changes in distance samplingMonitoring programmes are used to obtain local density and abundance estimates. However it is uncertain to what extent they are effective in detecting changes in abundance when they occur. To evaluate and optimise monitoring efforts at a range of numerical, temporal and spatial scales statistical power analysis is particularly useful. Here, we used a single platform line transect survey data to estimate detection function of Harbour Porpoises (Phocoena phocoena) in three Special Areas of Conservation, Ireland. Using generalised mixed additive model estimates with a zero-inflated distribution and detection offsets, we simulated data with known properties and with a given local abundance decline from 0% (no change, baseline) to 80%. Simulations incorporate: abundance change, zero-inflation, detection function, daily and transect-level variability. For each simulated dataset, a distance function was fitted from which abundance was calculated and compared with a baseline of no change. Finally, the significance of the slope over time was used to calculate the power to detect change in abundance as a function of survey design. High power was achieved only at considerable abundance decline, e.g. 30% in one of the areas. Interestingly, higher survey frequency or increased number of survey days and transects improved detection power only marginally. This could be due to the high variability in the data. This simulation-based approach allows to estimate power to detect abundance changes under different scenarios over a specified time period and can facilitate survey design for early detection of abundance declines.
What is the price of approximation? Saddlepoint methods in abundance estimationThere is a class of capture-recapture models where capture histories are subject to a known but non- reversible corruption. Examples of such models are the two-source model, where animals are captured by two protocols (say DNA and photo) that can be matched within protocol but not between protocols, model M(t,?) for misidentification, among others.The complex nature of the likelihood functions for such models has recently led to the application of saddlepoint approximations.Interpretation of the saddlepoint approximation as a likelihood function offers an alternative to classical maximum likelihood estimation (MLE) in situations where the true likelihood function is intractable, but the moment generating function of the underlying random variable is readily available. This is the case for such capture-recapture models. So how many animals do we sacrifice/invent when we apply the saddlepoint approximation in abundance estimation?This study focuses on the validation of parameter estimates resulting from saddlepoint approximation. We propose a formula that evaluates the correctness of these estimates based on gradient computation of the neglected term in the first-order saddlepoint approximation. We perform confirmatory tests on the formula using capture-recapture models of interest and finally showcase the structure of an R package for estimation and validation based on saddlepoint methods.
A multi-site, multi-species capture-recapture model to quantify and describe the survival of Atlantic salmon and sea trout smolts during their migration to seaIt has been speculated that the first migration to sea is a bottleneck of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) and sea trout (Salmo trutta) smolt survival. However, this belief is based on multiple studies of few individuals on single rivers, rather than a single large study. We monitored the first migration to sea of over 400 salmon and trout smolts across four estuaries discharging into the English Channel over two years using acoustic telemetry. Acoustic recordings on these individuals were treated as capture-recapture observations in a custom hidden Markov model written in NIMBLE to quantify and describe general salmon and trout smolt survival rates during their migration to sea. Spatial and temporal variations in their survival rate were described using covariates including site and abiotic variables (temperature, salinity, dissolved oxygen, flow), together with year and receiver. Species differences were described using a species covariate, together with other biotic (age, sex, length, body condition, migration speed, migration timing) variables.Results of this study will be used to improve the management of migratory species moving through area of intense and growing human activities, such as estuaries.
Inferring multi-species interactions from camera trap data with Hawkes processesInter-specific interactions play a key role in the structure and functioning of ecological communities. However, they are very difficult to observe directly because of the high number of species and the scale of natural ecosystems.Camera traps have become popular to gather large amounts of data in a non-invasive and automated manner. In particular, camera traps can gather invaluable information on how species are distributed in space and time in their natural environment.Few methods exist to study the influence species have on the multi-species distribution patterns of the community, which could be informative about species interactions. More importantly, most existing methods are ill-suited to the type of data provided by camera traps, mainly because many of them aggregate data over some time unit, thus losing a large part of the temporal information.The Hawkes model seems to be a good candidate to fill this gap: this model is a point process which can model the excitatory or inhibitory effect of a given species occurrence at a camera trap on the following species. It is used in many other fields, for example to model earthquake aftershocks, neuronal spike trains or financial market fluctuations.I will present the scientific questions that this method could answer and illustrate this tool on an example from a camera trap dataset of large animal communities of the African savanna, collected as part of the Snapshot Safari program.
Principal spatial patterns and size of maps’ portfolio - Octopus vulgaris off Mauritania from 1987 to 2017.The main objective was to define the concept of maps portfolio and to show how it can be developed in real case studies. The secondary objective was to identify the main recurrent spatial patterns of octopus, a cornerstone stock of the Mauritanian ecosystem, during each spawning season, and to discuss their respective sizes.Mauritania (1987-2017) Octopus vulgarisFor each spawning season, the principal spatial patterns were defined as a subset of the Empirical Orthogonal Maps (EOM) explaining at least 60% of the input variability, demonstrating strong spatial structure and, significantly correlated with abundance.During the hot season, one single principal map explainedhalf (48%) of the overall variability of the initial data. Its amplitude was strongly correlated with the abundance of octopus (correlation coefficient of0.79 and p-value = 7.4e-07). During the cold season, the biogeography of octopus was more composite. Ten spatial patterns was needed to explain 62% of the initial variability. Five of these were correlated with abundance and had strong spatial structures. One particular map showed significant correlation with the upwelling index few months before and represented the spatial patters that was connected with this key environmental factor.The concept of maps portfolio is developed, and notably their sizes, which are the effective number of spatial patterns amongst which octopus mainly composed its distribution. The size of portfolio is expected to be a proxy for the resilience of the systems. In case of large portfolio, one process governing biomass distribution can diminish without damaging the overall system compensated by other processes. Systems associated with small portfolio could be more fragile. A perspective of this work could be to quantify the sizes of numerous portfolio and to connect them to knowledge on the resilience of the system they characterize.
Integrated species distribution modelling with citizen science dataSpecies distribution models are valuable tools for studying and mapping species distributions. These models also have the potential to be valuable tools in the investigation of seasonal and climatic changes in species distributions. However, to effectively investigate seasonal and climatic changes large amounts of data covering vast periods of time and space are needed but such data do not exist. A possible remedy is to combine various ecological data sets in a task called integrated species distribution modelling. Integrated Species Distribution Models (IDMs) typically combine structured survey data with unstructured opportunistic data such as that obtain via citizen science. Citizen science data sets however typically contain sampling bias. Not accounting for this bias can lead to models that perform markedly worse than models built on a single data set. In this presentation we discuss the development of an integrated modelling strategy that allows for effective handling of sampling bias in citizen science data.
Long-term drivers of bream (Abramis brama) somatic growth in a temperate reservoirFish populations play an important role in freshwater ecosystems and provide crucial ecosystem services such as nutrient recycling and food for humans and other animals. Given the importance of fish to both ecosystems and people, it is critical to monitor fish populations over time to ensure their health and sustainability. Population monitoring provides important data for scientific research aimed at understanding fish ecology and dynamics as well as the environmental drivers that influence individuals and population. In this study, we focus on the analysis of the bream (Abramis brama) population in the ?ímov reservoir in Czechia for four decades (1980 to 2020). This species is widely distributed across Europe and is an important component of many freshwater ecosystems. Based on a detailed analysis of somatic growth data from the bream population across different environmental conditions, we identified key drivers of somatic growth in this species. Our results indicate that temperature, water transparency, and chlorophyll content are key factors influencing somatic growth in bream. These findings can help inform management decisions designed to promote healthy fish populations and sustainable stock for this species. Overall, our results highlight the importance of studying fish at both the individual and population levels to fully understand their ecology and dynamics and hopefully help inform management decisions aimed at conserving this important species.
